Barre's Old Labor Hall

(Socialist Labor Party Hall)

Exterior Architectural Description


The Barre Socialist Labor Party Hall is a 50" x 108" rectangular brick structure arranged on a northwest axis. Built in 1900, the Hall reflects no specific architectural style. The entire building is constructed in a running bond and sits on an exposed half story brick basement with a granite foundation. The Hall is divided into two sections, the two-story flat-roofed front portion and the single story gambrel roofed rear projection. The gambrel roof is covered in asphalt shingles. A wide molded wood cornice wraps around the roofline of the building.

The front section of the Hall measures 50" x 25"with the primary facade of the facing northwest. The mass of this section above the basement level is arranged into seven bays, two piles deep and two stories high. The center entrance is reached by ascending eight granite steps and is composed of a double leaf, five panel wood door with a four pane segmental fanlight. The fanlight is set within a double coursed brick arch springing from corbeled brick imposts. Directly above this is a granite medallion with the symbol of the Socialist Labor Party, an arm bearing a hammer, carved in bas-relief. All of the fenestration along the first and second story level of the building is 1/1-sash windows with segmental arch windows and segmental brick lintels. The windows at the basement level are three-pane sash divided by vertical muntins with segmental arches.


Interior Architectural Description

The interior of Barre Old Labor Hall is divided into three sections, the basement, the two story front section of the building, and the hall area in the rear portion of the structure. All measurements are estimated to the nearest foot.

The first floor plan of the Labor Hall is made up of two areas, the front rooms and entrance composing one area and the meeting hall to the rear. All of the windows on the first and second floors of the building are 1/1 sash windows with flat stock trim. The ceilings in the entrance and two rooms are nine feet high. The stair hall which measures 10'x18', is accessed from the outside through double leaf, five panel doors. This space contains a stairway leading upstairs along the southwest wall and a doorway accessing the northeast room. The stair hall flows into the southwest room through a large opening in the wall. A southeast door opens into the meeting hall and a door behind the stairs leads to the basement.

The northeast room is 19'x25' and retains much of its original fabric. The main architectural elements in this room include its maple flooring, pressed tin ceiling, bead board dado, windows, and plaster walls. There are three windows on the northwest wall and two on its northeast wall all having flat stock trim. A modern door has been added to the southeast wall to allow access to the meeting hall.

The southwest room is 17'x25' and has gone through some change over time. Modern wall paneling (craftwall) and ceiling materials are in the process of being removed to reveal the original plaster surfaces. There are three windows on the northwest wall and three on the southwest wall. A large opening approximately eight feet wide has been created in the southeast wall of this room that enters into the meeting hall. The remains of a small, 4'x4' restroom are located in the northeast corner of the room.
