SEOUL , South Korea
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
The United States may provide North Korea with economic aid if the communist state allows inspection of a suspect underground nuclear site , a South Korean newspaper reported Friday .
Former U.S. Defense Secretary William Perry , the Clinton administration 's point man on North Korea , discussed such an appeasement approach with other U.S. government experts earlier this week , said the Kukmin Daily , quoting an unidentified diplomatic source .
The report said the United States would broach that idea to North Korea when both sides meet in New York and Washington in early December to address American concerns about the underground site suspected of being used to produce nuclear weapons .
Officials at Seoul 's Foreign Ministry were unable to confirm or deny the report .
In discussions earlier this month in Pyongyang , North Korea rejected a U.S. request for unconditional access to the site , arguing that the facility is not nuclear-related .
North Korea said , however , that it would allow a one-time inspection of the site if the United States compensates for its `` groundless '' accusations concerning the facility .
American officials turned down a North Korean demand for dlrs 300 million for the right to inspect the project , located in a mountainside at Kumchang -ri , 25 miles -LRB- 40 kilometers -RRB- northwest of Yongbyon .
The Kukmin said although the U.S. policy against financial compensation for such inspections remained unchanged , Washington was considering an alternative of providing humanitarian aid through the U.N. Development Program .
`` The idea is emerging as a persuasive option , '' Kukmin quoted its source as saying .
`` The aid will be nothing like the direct financial compensation that North Korea demands . ''
The U.N. Development Program is spearheading an international effort to provide technical and other assistance to help North Korea revive its devastated agricultural and other economic sectors .
The U.S. State Department says any North Korean attempt to develop nuclear weapons would violate a 1994 agreement between the two countries .
Under the 1994 agreement with the United States , North Korea agreed to abandon its suspect nuclear weapons program .
In return , it will get two safe nuclear reactors worth dlrs 4.6 billion plus substitute fuel oil and other economic benefits .
