SEOUL , South Korea
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">In a policy shift aimed at luring North Korea towards peace , South Korean businesses will be allowed to freely ship industrial facilities to the communist state , officials said Saturday .</ENAMEX>
A severe financial crisis has idled many plants in South Korea .
And the new policy was expected to entice businesses to relocate their extra gear to the labor-cheap North .
Until now , South Korean companies had to get government permission when they sent machinery and other production facilities worth more than dlrs 1 million to the North .
`` The government abolishes that restriction , effective next Wednesday , to boost economic exchanges with the North , '' the Ministry of National Unification said in a statement .
In March , the government of President Kim Dae -jung announced it will lift virtually all restrictions on investment in North Korea under its new of strategy of engaging the North , rather than isolating it .
Saturday 's move was the first policy follow-up on that announcement .
It also comes in tandem with the planned visit to the North next week by a South Korean tycoon .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Chung Ju -yung , owner of the giant Hyundai group , will drive 500 cows into North Korea Tuesday across the Demilitarized Zone that separates the two Koreas .
The cows are part of a gift Chung has promised to give North Korea in return for his visit aimed at visiting his native hometown in the North and looking into business opportunities there .</ENAMEX>
The Koreas were divided into the communist North and the capitalist South in 1945 .
Their border is sealed , with nearly 2 million troops deployed on both sides .
The past South Korean governments had permitted only piecemeal investment in the North .
Businessmen have had to go through lengthy government red tape simply to get a permission to discuss a deal in the North .
Such negotiations have often been suspended at the slightest sign of political tension .
Seoul also is prodding the United States to follow suit and ease its economic sanctions against North Korea .
