SEOUL , South Korea
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">South Korea 's richest man plans to herd 500 cows into North Korea next week in a cattle drive aimed at cracking open the world 's most heavily guarded border .
Chung Ju -yung , owner of the giant Hyundai group , is to drive the cattle through Panmunjom , the tiny truce village in the center of the Demilitarized Zone that separates the two Koreas .</ENAMEX>
Barring last-minute hitches , the cows will be given to North Korea as a gift and Chung will spend eight days looking into business opportunities in the North .
The South Korean government said Friday that both it and the communist government of North Korea have approved Chung 's visit , beginning Tuesday .
Unification Ministry officials said Chung will cross the border along with eight family members .
The cows will be transported on 50 Hyundai trucks .
Six other members of his entourage , mostly Hyundai executives , will fly to North Korea by way of Beijing and join the Chung family later , they said .
Working officials of both Koreas met at Panmunjom on Friday and agreed that the cows will be trucked into the North one hour before the South Korean tycoon and his family walk across the border into the North .
Seoul government officials said North Korea rejected a request by South Korean reporters for permission to let them temporarily cross the border inside Panmunjom to cover the transfer of cows .
Chung 's visit comes as South Korea is trying to induce its reclusive , hunger-stricken northern neighbor to open itself to the world .
It will be Chung 's second visit to North Korea , where he was born 82 years ago .
He visited his hometown in 1989 and agreed to several joint venture business projects , including a ship repair yard .
The cows are part of a gift Chung has promised to give North Korea in return for his visit .
He gave the North 10,000 tons of corn in May and is committed to ship an additional 500 cows and 40,000 tons of corn later this year .
Chung will be the first South Korean civilian to visit North Korea via Panmunjom for private purposes .
The village is where the truce was signed that ended the 1950-53 Korean War .
The Koreas were divided into the communist North and the capitalist South in 1945 .
Their border is sealed , with nearly 2 million troops deployed on both sides .
Seoul government officials said they authorized Chung 's visit under President Kim Dae -jung 's `` sunshine policy , '' which calls for engaging North Korea rather than isolating it .
South Korean businessmen now can freely carry out trade and investment in North Korea .
Hyundai officials said that during his stay in the North , Chung will discuss business opportunities .
The Seoul government also is prodding the United States to follow suit and ease its economic sanctions against North Korea .
