SEOUL , South Korea
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">South Korea 's richest man plans to herd 500 cows into hunger-stricken North Korea next week in a gesture of generosity aimed at improving relations between these two bitter rivals .
Chung Ju -yung , owner of the giant Hyundai group , is to drive the cattle through Panmunjom , the tiny truce village in the center of the heavily fortified Demilitarized Zone that separates the two Koreas , a South Korean official said .</ENAMEX>
The South Korean government said that both it and North Korea have approved Chung 's visit , which begins Thursday .
Barring last-minute hitches , the cows will be given to North Korea to help ease a food shortage in the reclusive communist state .
Chung will then spend eight days looking into business opportunities in the North .
It will be Chung 's second visit to North Korea , where he was born 82 years ago .
He visited his hometown in 1989 and agreed to several joint venture business projects , including a ship repair yard .
Unification Ministry officials said Chung will cross the border along with eight family members .
The cows will be transported on 50 Hyundai trucks .
The cows are part of a gift Chung has promised to give North Korea in return for his visit .
He gave the North 10,000 tons of corn in May and is committed to ship an additional 500 cows and 40,000 tons of corn later this year .
Chung will be the first South Korean civilian to visit North Korea via Panmunjom , where the truce was signed that ended the 1950-53 Korean War .
The Korean peninsula was divided into the communist North and the capitalist South in 1945 .
Their border is the most heavily fortified in the world , with nearly 2 million troops deployed on both sides .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Seoul government officials said they authorized Chung 's visit under President Kim Dae -jung 's `` sunshine policy , '' which calls for engaging North Korea rather than isolating it .</ENAMEX>
The Seoul government is prodding the United States to follow suit in easing economic sanctions and allowing free trade and investment in North Korea .
