WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Secretary of State Madeleine Albright announced today a 400,000-ton emergency donation of food to North Korea , raising the total U.S. commitment for the year to 600,000 tons .
Albright made the announcement as North Korea prepared to receive a team of U.S. technical experts to inspect an underground construction site believed by some U.S. officials to be part of a nuclear weapons development project .
The inspection will begin Thursday .
Albright made the announcement at a news conference at which she was accompanied by South Korean Foreign Minister Hong Soon -young .
Similar to previous U.S. food aid commitments to North Korea , the 400,000-ton donation was offered in response to an appeal by the U.N. World Food Program .
The United States has responded positively to a number of such appeals for food for North Korea over the past several years .
Drought , flooding and an inefficient production system have produced widespread famine in North Korea .
Hundreds of thousands are believed to have died .
Earlier , Hong said his government may be forced by public opinion to drop its policy of accommodation with North Korea unless authorities in Pyongyang offer a positive response soon .
The policy will not be politically sustainable unless it achieves `` tangible results , '' Hong told a gathering at Georgetown University .
`` That is why we are encouraging North Korea to seize this initiative , '' he said .
Hong has been here since Thursday , meeting with Defense Secretary William Cohen and other officials .
He acknowledged that the policy of one-sided concessions by South Korea cannot last forever .
`` There is no such thing as permanent giving in international relations , '' he said .
Through a policy of food assistance and economic initiatives , South Korean President Kim Dae -jung has extended the olive branch to North Korea in hopes of easing tensions on the peninsula .
Hong said he is cautiously optimistic that North Korea will respond positively to Seoul 's initiative .
`` We are expecting to have the concessions , '' he said .
`` We do expect to have some response eventually . ''
The more North Korea values the benefits it is deriving from South Korea 's humanitarian assistance and other initiatives , he said , the more that country will be interested in pursuing a dialogue .
Under one unprecedented initiative that began six months ago , thousands of South Korean tourists have been visiting a scenic mountain on the North 's east coast .
The $ 942 million contract is the largest joint venture since the two Koreas were divided more than 50 years ago , Many American analysts are skeptical about the South Korean policy of accommodation , citing evidence that North Korea is developing a missile capability as well as weapons of mass destruction .
They see this as proof of North Korea 's unwillingness to reciprocate .
But Hong said South Korea , with help from the United States , is pursuing its detente policies from a position of military strength .
In the event of war , he said , North Korea would perish while South Korea would undergo enormous suffering .
This , he added , is not the outcome Seoul is seeking .
South Korea wants the North to be `` a real partner in peace and economic cooperation , '' he said .
