SEOUL , South Korea
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
President Kim Dae -jung said Friday he will seek more economic assistance and propose a new policy of engagement toward North Korea when he meets President Clinton next week .
The first opposition leader to take power in South Korea , Kim leaves for the United States Saturday for a nine-day visit .
It will be his second overseas trip since taking office in February .
He visited London in April to attend an Asia - Europe summit .
`` I will stress that Korea - U.S. relations should be developed beyond the partnership in security and trade to a new partnership on a higher level based on a shared belief in the principles of democracy and a free market economy , '' Kim told a nationally televised news conference marking his first 100 days in office .
Kim said his talks with Clinton in Washington on June 9 will focus on U.S. assistance to help rebuild South Korea 's battered economy and measures to lead North Korea to open its closed communist society .
He also said he will appeal for U.S. and other international investment in South Korea , whose economy was bailed out by the International Monetary Fund in December .
Kim said Seoul would support any moves by the United States to promote political and economic detente with North Korea .
`` As was shown in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe , the engagement policy of the United States and the sunshine policy of the new South Korean government will be more effective for North Korea , '' he said .
Kim 's remarks were a departure from the policy of past South Korean governments which tried to contain North Korea rather than engage it .
Inter - Korea relations remain chilly because of military and political tensions on the peninsula .
The North has shunned South Korea as a dialogue partner while pushing vigorously to improve ties with Washington .
Kim said he would not oppose a move by Washington to ease or lift U.S. economic sanctions on North Korea .
Under the Trading With the Enemy Act , U.S. companies are prohibited from doing business with North Korea .
The United States fought on South Korea 's side in the 1950-53 Korean War .
`` I 'm not pessimistic at all about our relations with North Korea , '' Kim said .
The president said there were signs that North Korea would change its hard-line policy toward South Korea but declined to elaborate .
Kim said South Korea has largely succeeded in overcoming a foreign exchange crisis but the country still has a long way to go to rebuild its shattered economy .
To restore investor confidence , Kim said he would accelerate reforms in the latter part of this year to restructure the economy .
The reforms , he said , will include faster liquidation of financially weak banks and companies and a disintegration of South Korea 's bloated , family-oriented conglomerates , or chaebol .
Chaebol , which typically control 40 to 50 subsidiaries , are largely blamed for causing South Korea 's financial crisis .
At least eight of them collapsed in the past year , saddling banks with billions of dollars in bad loans .
