WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- The Clinton administration announced Thursday a 50,000-ton food donation for North Korea and also offered rare praise for North Korean President Kim Jong Il for his role in bringing about this week 's historic summit with South Korea .
State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said the food donation was long planned and therefore should not be interpreted as a reward for the breakthroughs achieved at the summit .
The food aid will be distributed by the U.N. World Food Program , which has monitors in North Korea to ensure that it is sent to the intended recipients .
The new donation brings to 450,000 tons the combined U.S. donations over the past year through the WFP .
An additional 100,000 tons was distributed through a private group .
North Korea has been suffering acute food shortages over the years as a result of drought , flooding and mismanagement of the agricultural sector .
The summit has changed perceptions here about Kim Jong Il who , since taking power in 1994 , had acquired few admirers here because of his ruthless repression , attempts to intimidate neighbors and continuing embrace of policies that have contributed to a prolonged famine .
Boucher , voicing the change in attitude , said the United States is `` pleased that North Korea 's leader demonstrated practical statesmanship as he reached agreement with the South 's president on a number of important steps that we think do bode well for the future of the peninsula . ''
In a separate statement , Secretary of State Madeleine Albright said she wanted to `` acknowledge the positive steps that Kim Jong Il is taking to move North Korea out of the isolation of the past , toward an era of reconciliation with the South . ''
The two leaders agreed to work toward the eventual reunification of the peninsula and to promote reunification of divided families .
At the White House , President Clinton welcomed the agreements reached on humanitarian and economic cooperation and for a future summit in Seoul .
He said he hoped that both sides `` will continue down this promising path . ''
He said the summit `` marks an initial , hopeful step toward peace and reconciliation . ''
Sen. Joseph Biden of Delaware , the senior Democrat on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , said in a statement that he was encouraged by the latest developments .
`` We are beginning to see the rewards of patient diplomacy backed by strong deterrence , '' he said .
Still , Biden added , `` Obviously much work needs to be done , especially in the security realm , where North Korea 's irresponsible proliferation of ballistic missile technology poses a threat not only to South Korea but to others . ''
For the United States , the next step in promoting improved relations with North Korea will be formal implementation of steps announced last September to ease sanctions against Pyongyang .
Once the paperwork is completed , North Korea would be allowed to export raw materials and goods to the United States and would open air and shipping routes between the two countries .
An announcement on these measures is expected shortly .
Clinton 's order would not affect a ban on exports of military and sensitive dual-use items or most types of federal assistance .
