-LRB- Distributed by New York Times Special Features -RRB- Economically , politically and strategically , the United States and Korea enjoy a very special relationship .
The United States liberated Korea from Japanese imperialism and defended it from North Korean Communist aggression .
U.S. assistance played a central role in rebuilding our economy from the ruins of the Korean War .
U.S. help has also been crucial in overcoming the economic crisis that began late last year .
In return , the Republic of Korea has also done its best as friend of the United States .
Economically , it has not hesitated to help the United States in its times of need .
In the 1980s when the United States was suffering enormous trade deficits , Korea dispatched several purchase missions to the United States and bought billions of dollars ' worth of American goods .
In 1996 , Korea imported American goods actively , to the extent that it incurred a deficit of $ 11.6 billion with the United States out of a total trade deficit of $ 20.5 billion .
Moreover , several Korean companies have invested more than $ 1 billion each in the United States .
Currently , Korean Air plans to purchase $ 2 billion worth of aircraft , despite our foreign exchange crisis .
Korea is neither a superpower nor a rich country .
However , Korea has worked more closely with the United States than virtually any nation in the world in many areas , including political , military and economic issues .
This is , of course , in our own national interests ; likewise , a friendly relationship with the Republic of Korea is in America 's national interests .
Now that Korea is suffering economic difficulties , I hope America will continue to actively provide us with assistance and investment .
Not if only is Northeast Asia very important to the national interests of the United States , but it also needs the United States to maintain peace and stability and promote prosperity .
In this respect , the continued presence of the U.S. troops currently stationed in Northeast Asia is absolutely necessary , just as U.S. troops are necessary for stability and peace in Europe , even in these post- Cold War years .
The key to Northeast Asian peace and prosperity at this particular stage is settlement of peace on the Korean Peninsula .
Unfortunately , the Korean Peninsula , the last hot spot of the Cold War era , still faces the potential threat of armed conflict .
In order to deter any provocation and nurture enduring peace , a solid military alliance between Korea and the United States should be maintained and further reinforced .
Close cooperation between our two countries for peace is more important now than ever before for several reasons : -- First , broader understanding and cooperation are needed between the Republic and the United States in the project of building light-water nuclear reactors in North Korea .
-- Second , we should be careful not to isolate North Korea from the international community .
In principle , I do not oppose U.S. efforts to expand the scope of its relations with North Korea .
But I believe we need to exercise caution so as to avoid the possibility of North Korea perceiving a gap in the positions between the Republic and the United States and using it to its advantage .
Only if close coordination is maintained between our two countries , will smooth dialogue between Seoul and Pyongyang be possible .
-- Third , issues involving economic and other forms of interaction between the South and the North should be initiated and duly observed by the two parties concerned .
We cannot emphasize enough the need to embrace North Korea as a member of the international community while maintaining a solid security agreement between the Republic and the United States .
The three fundamental principles of my administration 's policies toward North Korea remain : -- First , we will not tolerate any military threat or armed provocation .
This principle is based on my belief that any provocative action is certain to have extremely serious consequences for both the South and the North , and would threaten the stability and security of Northeast Asia at large .
-- Second , we will not seek to undermine North Korea -- or unify the divided land by absorbing it .
We all know the political , economic and psychological difficulties that both West and East Germans suffered after West Germany absorbed the East .
One cannot even imagine what kind of difficulties might be experienced , if we tried to undermine North Korea and annex it .
I declare , once and for all , we have no intention of absorbing North Korea .
-- Third , we will pursue genuine interaction and reconciliation with the North .
Our economic interaction and cooperation will be based on the Agreement on Reconciliation , Nonaggression , and Exchanges and Cooperation between the South and the North adopted in 1991 .
In accordance with this new guideline , the new Korean government is now pursuing a policy of separating politics from private business activities .
We will also encourage exchanges of people and promote cooperation in cultural , social and industrial areas .
As a case in point , the founder of Hyundai Corp. is planning to make a road journey back to North Korea very soon .
He will be taking 500 cows with him all the way to his birth place , and will donate the animals to the people there .
Koreans have had a special attachment to cows since ancient times .
The giver and receivers of the cows are sure to share feelings of genuine love that have been suppressed for the past 50 years of separation .
This trip will be a good start toward reconciliation .
As for the exchanges and cooperative efforts between the South and the North , my government directives are as follows : -- First , we will continue to provide emergency humanitarian assistance -- whether by the government or private resources -- with no strings attached .
We have already donated 50,000 tons of food through the Red Cross , and recently announced provision of another 50,000 tons through the World Food Program .
-- Second , we will promote economic exchanges and cooperation between the South and the North .
To facilitate such exchanges , my government has recently lifted some restrictions on business trips to North Korea and abolished ceilings on investment in the North .
It is clear that both sides will benefit if capital and technology from the South are combined with labor in the North .
-- Third , our non-emergency governmental aid will be provided under the principle of reciprocity .
In April , we did not commit fertilizer provisions requested by North Korea because they declined our humanitarian request to arrange reunions of family members who have been separated for half a century .
We are ready to provide fertilizer to the North Koreans as soon as we receive a positive response on our proposal .
Korea is unique in that it has never in its history waged a war against any nation in the West and has never been colonized by a Western country .
I understand my administration 's position is firmly supported by the United States , Japan , China , and Russia , as well as the Korean people .
All of this is positive in support of our efforts to secure peace on the Korean Peninsula .
-LRB- Kim Dae Jung is president of the Republic of Korea .
This commentary is adapted from an address , `` New Challenges for the Korean Peninsula and Northeast Asia , '' by President Kim Dae Jung on June 8 at the Council on Foreign Relations , in New York . -RRB-
--
