TOKYO --
North Korea 's preparations for the test launching of a new long-range missile this month have caused a dramatic change of course in defense strategy and diplomacy for both Japan and South Korea .
Japan is considering stretching the constitutional limits on its military while South Korea is beginning to overcome deep suspicions of Japan and consider ways to cooperate in the face of a common threat .
Japan has agreed to take part in a `` theater missile defense system '' created in Washington and at the same time is speeding up its own plans for a satellite surveillance system .
Most surprising is Japan 's decision to consider equipping its largely toothless air force with airborne refueling and attack capabilities that would enable its F -15s to launch retaliatory strikes against North Korea .
South Korea , whose capital , Seoul , lies within easy range of its northern neighbor 's missiles and artillery , has already indicated to Washington its desire to build new missiles capable of reaching much of North Korea , including the capital , Pyongyang .
Under a 1979 agreement , South Korea must obtain Washington 's consent before building missiles with a range of over 112 miles .
Last week , however , Defense Secretary William Cohen indicated the United States would work with South Korea to overcome that limit , something that could be accomplished if Korea joined the Missile Technology Control Regime .
Through a series of high level visits , and a cascade of statements aimed at the North Korean government , Washington has at once sought to dissuade Pyongyang from going ahead with the expected test , while reassuring American allies in the region .
The message , as stated here last week by Cohen , and repeated over and over by others , is that by launching a new missile with an estimated 3,700-mile range -- one theoretically able to strike Alaska or Hawaii -- North Korea has nothing to gain and everything to lose .
Still , as expectations of the imminent missile launching grow , what all of this activity reveals more than anything else is that in the and medium-term , Washington and its major Asian allies face a dearth of options in dealing with perhaps the world 's most isolated and unpredictable country .
Cohen seemed to acknowledge as much during a news conference here last week .
Referring to the carrot and stick approach that Washington and its allies have chosen to take toward Pyongyang , he said , `` We are prepared to work with North Korea to open economic and political opportunities , and North Korea should seize this chance to build a new and positive relationship .
`` A refusal to show restraint would , '' he said , result in `` stalling or indeed stopping potential cooperation . ''
Speaking in Seoul last week , Cohen said that the United States would mobilize `` all available means '' against North Korea if it fires the new missile , known as the Taepodong II .
But this does not include the use of military force , he has said repeatedly .
Indeed , Cohen 's statements reflect the policy options being considered in Washington , Tokyo and Seoul , where the growing assumption is that nothing can be done to prevent the missile launching .
These options include attempts at working with North Korea , particularly in the area of the so-called `` agreed framework '' under which Pyongyang has forsworn the deployment or proliferation of nuclear weapons .
In exchange , North Korea is entitled to economic assistance in the form of food and fuel deliveries , and help in building a light-water nuclear reactor for generating electricity .
Robert Manning , a former senior State Department policy adviser , have suggested letting North Korea `` stew in its own juices , '' amid a near economic collapse attended by one of the worst famines of the century .
In response to a new missile test , the United States , Japan and South Korea must `` cut aid and restrict contacts , '' he wrote in a recent policy paper .
Undermining arguments for either approach , however , is a fundamental uncertainty about what drives North Korean decision-making .
What the West sees as carrots , things like increased trade , aid , travel and political contacts , for example , may paradoxically be what some in North Korea fear most .
North Korea 's withered economy is so fragile that even gradual attempts at opening it up could be deeply destabilizing .
Certainly , having witnessed the example of the demise of the Soviet Union and its Eastern European allies , Pyongyang will be loath to do anything that smacks of reducing near absolute government control over people and the economy .
If the problem is seen through this prism , those suggesting the firmest responses to the North 's expected missile test may inadvertently be Pyongyang 's best allies .
According to this view , nothing , perhaps , is more important to retaining the cohesiveness of President Kim Jong Il 's regime than furthering a view of the outside world as hostile and predatory .
`` There have n't been very many satisfactory options for dealing with North Korea for 40 years , '' said Morton I. Abramowitz , author of a recent policy paper published by the Council on Foreign Relations that advocates a mixture of continued engagement and limited sanctions in case of a new missile test .
`` They are a dying state , or a near-dying state .
To change that , they have to change the way they do business , and this involves opening up , which some undoubtedly find terrifying , '' he said .
However , if North Korea goes ahead with its missile test , as is widely expected , it may find its famous unpredictability matched by the political reactions of its neighbors , and even by Washington .
Already , South Korean President Kim Dae Jung is facing domestic criticism over the perceived slim returns from his <ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">`` Sunshine Policy '' toward the North , which has involved encouraging investments by South Korean companies and authorizing a lucrative , but tightly controlled tourism trade to North Korea .</ENAMEX>
In Japan , meanwhile , the prospect of a new missile launch has transformed the national debate over defense and security matters in ways that would have scarcely been imaginable only two years ago .
A previous generation of North Korean missiles , known as the Rodong , had long been capable of striking parts of Japan .
Even after the launch of a longer range Taepodong I missile last year , whose flight traversed Japanese airspace , deeply pacifist public opinion on defense questions scarcely countenanced any change in the military stance by the government .
In recent months , though , as expectations of the Taepodong II launch have grown , some have questioned aspects of Japan 's traditional and constitutionally-mandated anti-militarism , contributing to a wave of increasingly nationalistic sentiments among mainstream politicians .
`` Gradually Japanese people are becoming aware that they are facing a threat from North Korea , and this has been a very good chance for the society to re-evaluate our security posture , '' said Tomohisa Sakananaka , president of the Research Institute for Peace and Security , a private policy organization .
`` The Japanese Constitution since 1953 allows the country to take defensive measures against any threat against the nation 's existence .
That is not new , '' Sakananaka said .
`` But this is completely theoretical .
We do n't have any capability to attack North Korea . ''
It is now believed that a new missile test by North Korea would go a long way toward changing that .
`` We have four options , '' said Toshiyuki Shikata , a retired general with Japan 's National Self Defense Force .
`` We could just keep smiling and continuing the Sunshine Policy toward North Korea , or develop our own long-range missile , which people in the region and our own public opinion would oppose .
`` Between these two extremes we are choosing two other options : developing a theater missile defense system with the U.S. , which would take several years , and giving Japan retaliation capability through its air force .
If a Korean missile should fall in Japanese territory , and particularly cause casualties or some destruction , the prime minister could then order the destruction of North Korean missile sites , and I believe the Japanese public would support the government in these measures . ''
