TOKYO --
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">In an exercise that the U.S. military patroling between North and South Korea dubbed `` Operation Rawhide , '' the founder of the giant Hyundai conglomerate drove 500 cows across the border to the North on Tuesday in an effort to aid reconciliation on the divided peninsula .</ENAMEX>
Chung Ju -yung , the 83-year -old founder of Hyundai , which makes everything from cars to semiconductors , passed through Panmunjom at 10 a.m. , leading a convoy of 50 trucks filled with cattle from his ranch .
The cattle will be hooked up to plows and used to work farmland in North Korea , which has been suffering from food shortages that are aggravated by its political isolation .
Chung will stay in the North eight days , visiting his hometown of Tongchon in Kangwon Province and trying to do a little business , according to Kim Sangnyun , a spokesman for Chung .
He was accompanied by three brothers , two sons , and Hyundai officials and others who entered North Korea via Beijing .
`` At the border he announced that this visit wo n't just be a visit to his birthplace , '' Chung 's spokesman said .
`` He wants this visit to be a kind of cornerstone leading to North - South reunification and to peace . ''
North and South Korea have been bitter enemies for half a century , but the South Korean president , Kim Dae -jung , has increasingly been advocating a more pragmatic approach to the North , where the United States largely prohibits American companies from doing business .
Kim has said that greater political and economic engagement is the best way of softening the North 's hardline Stalinist stance , and he has unofficially designated South Korea 's business leaders as ambassadors to the North .
Chung has apparently taken that directive to heart .
While his visit is primarily humanitarian , the spokesman said Chung also plans to discuss with North Korean officials the potential for developing a resort that would cater to South Koreans visiting relatives there .
Last year , North Korea ran a trade surplus with South Korea , which is its third-largest trading partner after China and Japan .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">But the South Korean economic crisis has put a big dent in Seoul 's demand for gold , zinc and other metals that accounted for 50 percent of its imports from the North in 1997 .
North Korea is apparently in no rush to restore South Korean demand for its products .</ENAMEX>
Much of the demand comes in the form of `` processing on commission '' trade , under which South Korea ships pieces to North Korea where they are assembled and exported back to the South .
North Korea charges South Korea dollars for that kind of production , and although the Korean won has plunged against the dollar , the North has not adjusted its dollar prices .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">`` The conclusion I draw from that is that North Korea is not really interested in big South Korean investments , '' a Western diplomat said on Tuesday .</ENAMEX>
`` What they want is U.S. investment . ''
American companies are largely prohibited from doing any business in North Korea by the Trading With the Enemy Act , although some humanitarian aid has been permitted .
On a visit to Washington this month , Kim urged the United States and other Western countries to drop such barriers to trade with and investment in North Korea .
Chung 's efforts to thaw the deep freeze between North and South Korea did not start with cows .
He previously shipped 10,000 tons of corn across the border and plans to send another 40,000 tons over the next several months .
Chung chose to make a dramatic gesture with cattle because he has fond memories of selling one of his father 's cows to get the money that ultimately led to his success as a businessman , the spokesman said .
`` He has always been thinking that he owes something to the cows , '' the spokesman said .
