SEOUL , South Korea --
With the easing of economic sanctions against North Korea by the Clinton administration last week , U.S. corporations based here are beginning to assess business opportunities in a country that has been out of bounds for five decades .
North Korea , a country of 22 million people , many of them deprived of all but the most basic needs , represents an unknown world for U.S. business , but one with prospects both large and small : Businessmen here see the need for everything from large transportation and energy projects to modest consumer goods .
The president of the American Chamber of Commerce here , Jeffrey D. Jones , says that sketchy data indicate that North Koreans earn a wage of about $ 150 to $ 200 a month , much of it disposable income because the state provides housing and basic food .
If these wage figures are correct , Jones said , they exceed disposable income in parts of post- Communist Eastern Europe .
However , North Koreans who have fled to China in droves to escape famine have suggested that families are spending almost all their money on food .
And Jones warned that the process of opening up North Korea would be slow , in large part because of its government 's wariness about contact with outsiders .
In a meeting with U.S. business leaders , Secretary of State Madeleine Albright said , without giving specifics , that Washington was eager to encourage North Korea , one of the last outposts of strict Communist economy , to move into the international commercial system .
Businessmen said they envisioned North Korea developing credibility with major Western powers and then becoming eligible for funds from the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank .
This would lay the groundwork for major infrastructure projects , which in turn would attract basic chemical , petrochemical , plastics and paints industries .
Many analysts have predicted that the bare-bones North Korean economy , propped up lately by deliveries of food , fertilizer and fuel from South Korea , China , Japan and the United States , will collapse .
But some modest optimism has emerged , especially since the North Korean leader , Kim Jong Il , visited China last month .
He was urged by his Chinese allies to follow them in opening up his economy and was taken around computer companies in Beijing .
Telecommunications , including mobile phones , which are becoming a promising investment sector in China , will take years to organize in North Korea , Jones said .
Only 4.9 percent of households are believed to have phones in North Korea , according to South Korean statistics .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">A joint South - North economic committee was set up during the summit meeting of the two Korean leaders 10 days ago , and this panel is likely , in the beginning , to become the main conduit for business in the North .
Some South Korean companies already do such business , but Jones , a lawyer here , cautioned that of the four ventures with North Korea that he had been involved in , only one was still going .</ENAMEX>
Jones quoted the head of a major South Korean corporation as suggesting that there was no need for U.S. businesses to fret about competition .
`` If you are worried about a slice of the pie , there is no pie yet , '' the South Korean had said .
