SEOUL , August 20 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The building of two light-water nuclear reactors in the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea -LRB- DPRK -RRB- will serve as a catalyst in promoting exchanges between the two sides on the Korean Peninsula , observers here say .
Tuesday 's ground-breaking ceremony for the two 1,000-megawatt nuclear reactors in Sinpo , South Hamgyong Province , DPRK , signaled the conclusion of the nearly three year-long efforts to get the 1994 Geneva nuclear accord underway .
Under the Pyongyang - Washington accord , the U.S. -led multinational consortium of Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization -LRB- KEDO -RRB- will provide the two units of pressurized water reactors in exchange for the DPRK 's freezing of its Soviet -designed nuclear program which is more capable of producing weapon-grade plutonium .
The units also laid the foundation for long-term rapprochement of the two sides , in which South Korea will play a leading role in the or eight-year-long reactor building , observers say .
South Korea Electric Power Corporation -LRB- KEPCO -RRB- will take the major responsibility for building the infrastructure prior to the full-scale construction as the nuclear project 's prime contractor , while South Korea Telecommunication Company was permitted to join the work of improving the tele-facilities .
Two South Korean diplomats were placed at KEDO 's office in Sinpo on July 28 , for the first time since the division of the two sides .
For telecommunications , direct phone lines were established on August 4 , the first ones in several decades in which Seoul and Pyongyang had only the hot lines between their Red Cross societies .
KEPCO said that more than 10 million men-days of workers will be involved annually in the project scheduled to be finished by the year 2004 , at a total cost of 3 trillion won -LRB- 3.36 billion U.S. dollars -RRB- .
When the construction work enters into a full swing in 2000 , a maximum of 7,000 workers from both the north and south would be toiling at the site a day , a KEPCO official said .
More than one million tons of building materials and equipment , including heavy-duty equipment , will be transported to Sinpo for the project , helping accelerate the exchange in the transportation sector between the two sides .
As the 8.93-million-square-meter construction involves personnel , equipment and raw materials from DPRK , Sinpo will naturally serve as a site for exchange and economic cooperation between the two sides , observers believe .
