KANDAHAR , Afghanistan
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Waving pistols in the air , five hijackers sped off in waiting cars Friday with two Islamic militants and a Muslim cleric released from Indian jails and escaped the country -- ending a tense eight-day standoff .
All 155 hostages on the Indian Airlines plane were freed unharmed , but the crisis -- the longest hijacking drama in more than a decade -- highlighted the explosive nature of the long-running dispute over the Himalayan territory of Kashmir .
Under the agreement made between India , the hijackers and the Taliban militia who rule most of Afghanistan , the hijackers agreed to end the eight-day crisis and free the hostages in exchange for the three prominent militants , who were being held in Indian jails .
The hijackers and their three associates sped away at sunset in four-wheel drive vehicles from the Kandahar airport , where they had kept the hostages in an Indian Airlines plane parked on the tarmac .
They also had one new hostage -- a Taliban soldier who was to guarantee their safety .
Saturday morning , a Taliban official said the hijackers had crossed the border .
He did not say where they escaped to -- but most likely it was into Pakistan , which shares a long , porous border with Afghanistan .
`` The Taliban hostage has come back to Kandahar and -LRB- the hijackers -RRB- have gone from the country , '' Taliban spokesman Rehnatullah Aga said .
Meanwhile , the freed hostages received a thunderous welcome in New Delhi , with thousands of relatives , airport employees , bystanders , police and journalists applauding and cheering as they landed from Kandahar and emerged one at a time into the terminal at the Indira Gandhi International Airport .
Joyful relatives hoisted the survivors on their shoulders or tossed them into the air .
The plane 's crew were carried through the terminal with garlands around their necks .
One old woman hugged her son until she fainted .
`` We were so terrorized nobody will be able to understand , '' said Indian businessman R.K. Ghosh .
`` ... most of the time they told us : ` Keep your heads down .
If you see us we will shoot you . ' ''
While the hijackers dropped several demands during negotiations -- including the release of 36 militants imprisoned in India -- they did win the release of cleric Masood Azhar , a leader of Harkat ul- Ansar , a group on a U.S. list of terrorist organizations .
The group is believed to have its training camps in Afghanistan .
The other prisoners released by India were Mushtaq Ahmed Zargar , chief commander of the rebel group Ul - Umar Mujahideen , and Ahmad Omar Sayed Sheikh , who was held in a New Delhi prison .
The three were flown to Afghanistan and the exchange happened shortly before sunset .
None of the passengers appeared harmed as the crisis ended , though one Indian passenger was killed shortly after the plane was seized Dec. 24 on a flight from Katmandu , Nepal to New Delhi .
Under the hostage-release deal , the Taliban said Friday afternoon it would not act against the hijackers for 10 hours -- a grace period that expires before dawn Saturday .
The Taliban sent a heavily armed group of soldiers with the fleeing hijackers to ensure that they left Afghanistan promptly .
Pakistan strongly denounced the hijacking , but has little control over its lengthy western border that may have been used as an escape route .
`` Hijackings are particularly abhorrent to us , '' said Pakistan 's Foreign Ministry .
`` We have no sympathy for such desperate acts . ''
Much remained at stake Friday for the Taliban , who have been ostracized internationally and are now under U.N. sanctions for refusing U.S. demands to hand over Osama bin Laden , a Saudi -born militant accused bombing two U.S. embassies in Africa in 1998 .
If the Taliban act against the hijackers , it could help improve their poor international standing .
But if the hijackers disappear , the Taliban 's reputation as a host for Islamic extremists will likely grow .
The names and nationalities of the hijackers remained a mystery , though they carried out their acts in support of Kashmir militants , who want either independence from India or union with Muslim Pakistan .
The hijacking drama ended peacefully , but demonstrated the volatile nature of the long-running dispute over Kashmir , the leading source of friction between India and Pakistan .
Both nations hold part of Kashmir and claim all of it .
India and Pakistan traded recriminations during the latest hijacking crisis , placing further strain on already bad relations .
Indian Foreign Minister Jaswant Singh said afterward that `` there is no bowing to terrorism . ''
The three prisoners , who had been convicted of terrorism , were released only to protect the lives of the hostages , he said .
`` I came here in a purely humanitarian capacity , '' Singh told a news conference shortly after the episode ended .
After the ordeal ended , some passengers were still trembling with fear , and one teen-age boy was sobbing , according to Abdul Qadir , a Taliban soldier who helped take the passengers off the plane .
Some of the older passengers were placed in wheelchairs .
`` So many times I thought I would never come back alive , '' said passenger Rajiv Ahuja .
`` Most of the time we were blindfolded . ''
