ISLAMABAD , Pakistan
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Afghanistan 's ruling Taliban and Pakistan 's military leaders have rebuffed U.S. appeals to crack down on terrorism , and one militant group warned Tuesday of a violent backlash if they tried .
On a visit to the region last week , a top American envoy urged the outlawing of a group blamed for hijacking an Indian plane last month and that steps also be taken to bring terror suspect Osama bin Laden to justice .
Pakistan did not agree to any specific actions .
India charges that Pakistan had a hand in the hijacking , a claim that the United States has rejected .
And in neighboring Afghanistan , Taliban leaders have refused to hand over bin Laden , charged in the United States with masterminding the deadly bombings of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998 .
Of particular concern to the United States is Harkat ul- Mujahedeen , the successor to a Pakistani -based organization that has been declared a terrorist group by Washington .
A spokesman for a sister organization , Harkat ul- Jehad , warned of violence if the government tried to close the group 's offices in Pakistan .
`` We will not hesitate to take any action and believe me there will be a free-for-all here in Pakistan .
It will be anarchy , '' Abu Mahmood Ashraf said .
He added that his group trains in Pakistan and Afghanistan to fight in Kashmir -- the flashpoint of two wars between India and Pakistan -- and `` in other Muslim countries where Muslims are being attacked . ''
Ashraf also called bin Laden a hero to Muslims worldwide .
`` Any injury or his death would be a great shock to us and we would not stop until we have severely punished the United States , '' he said .
India accuses Harkat ul- Mujahedeen of staging the Indian Airlines hijacking that ended with 155 hostages freed in exchange for the Indian government 's release of three members of the group .
President Clinton said Tuesday there was no evidence that Pakistan supported the hijacking , which Pakistan strongly condemned again on Tuesday .
`` The government of Pakistan regards the highjacking as abhorrent and is commited to prosecute any person or persons found and apprended on our territory , or in Kashmir , who may be suspected of havng committed that crime .
If they are convicted they will be subject to the death penalty , '' a spokesman for Pakistan 's foreign ministry said .
But State Department spokesman James P. Rubin cited concerns for some time `` that agencies of the Pakistani government have provided general support to a number of groups operating in Kashmir , including Harkat ul- Mujahedeen . ''
U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Karl Inderfurth discussed terrorism concerns last week when he met ruling Gen. Pervez Musharraf and other leaders of Pakistan .
`` We hope that the government of Pakistan will take steps against such extremist groups which carry out acts of violence inside Pakistan , as well as in the region , '' Inderfurth said , specifically naming Harkat ul- Mujahedeen .
Pakistan did not promise to crack down on such groups .
What Inderfurth got was a statement sharing Washington 's concern about terrorism .
Two days before the Oct. 12 military coup that ended civilian rule in Pakistan , then- Interior Minister Shujaat Hussein told The Associated Press that militant Islamic groups were created by Pakistan , its military and its intelligence agency .
Hussein said his government had asked the Taliban to shut down camps in Afghanistan , where Pakistanis were receiving military training .
While publicly denying the existence of these camps , Hussein said the Taliban privately promised Pakistan to close them .
The United States also has asked Pakistan , one of only three countries to recognize the Taliban , to use its influence against bin Laden .
Wakil Ahmed Muttawakil , the Taliban 's foreign minister , said Monday that bin Laden wo n't be extradited or handed over to the United States or a third country for trial .
Taliban leaders had met with Inderfurth , but of further discussions with the United States , Muttawakil said `` we do n't want to talk to them . ''
