Freedom for Masood Azhar , a Pakistani militant who recruited young men to fight Indian control over the state of Kashmir , is the one unvarying demand of the hijackers holding the Indian Airlines plane and its passengers .
Azhar , often referred to by the Muslim religious honorific of Maulana , has been in Indian custody since he was arrested in February 1994 in the embattled province .
After the hijacking , local press reports quoted a police official at the high-security jail where he is held as saying Azhar was one of the most devout prisoners , scrupulously following the Muslim practice of praying five times a day .
At the time of his arrest , Azhar , now 31 , was editing two religious publications that among other things urged young men to become fighters for causes like the Kashmir separatist movement .
He was known as a leader and spiritual guide in Harakat ul- Ansar , or the Partisan Movement , which helped recruit , train and deploy militants in Kashmir .
In the years since his arrest , the group has changed its name to Harakat ul- Mujahedeen , or the Fighters Movement .
The exact division of responsibility in these Muslim militant movements and their relations with other , similarly motivated political groups is often murky .
Something as simple as their frequent name changes are rarely explained publicly , but one reason in this case is believed to be that in October 1997 the U.S. State Department included Harakat ul- Ansar on a list of about 30 groups worldwide it considers sponsors of terrorism .
The State Department report on terrorism for 1998 said the group operated training camps in eastern Afghanistan and claims that some of its fighters were killed in the strikes on camps in Afghanistan used by Osama bin Laden in August 1998 .
The United States made the strikes in retaliation for the alleged involvement of bin Laden 's organization in the bombings of the American Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania on Aug. 7 , 1998 .
The various Islamic groups in the region are believed to share the logistics , costs and trainers at the camps .
The Taliban militia that controls most of Afghanistan grew out of the same religious movement in Pakistan that gave rise to various militant organizations .
Aside from sharing vaguely enunciated ideological and religious underpinnings , there are no overt connections between the jailed cleric and his group with bin Laden .
But when the United States tried to force Afghanistan to deport bin Laden , the militant groups in Kashmir were among the first to offer him asylum .
It has also not been fully confirmed who the hijackers are , although one is reportedly Azhar 's brother .
His family has denied the report .
This is the third violent attempt to gain release for Azhar .
The two previous attempts were kidnappings of Westerners .
In the first case , the victims were released , but in the second case in 1995 , one victim escaped , one was beheaded and the remaining four tourists -- an American , two Britons and one German -- are still missing and presumed dead .
According to Indian government officials and subsequent official reports , Azhar was born to a wealthy , land-owning family in 1968 in the central Pakistani city of Bahawalpur .
Local press reports say that after completing his education , he taught at an Islamic institution in Karachi before gravitating to the publications distributed by the religious movement he joined .
He speaks Punjabi , Urdu , Arabic and English .
In 1992 , he went to Kashmir to broaden his recruitment efforts , according to Indian officials , although his family has maintained that he went as a journalist .
This month marks the 10th anniversary of the bitter fighting in Kashmir , a predominantly Muslim province , to either gain outright independence or to join Pakistan .
An Indian government report described Azhar as a `` highly motivated , committed and fundamentalist militant . ''
