UNITED NATIONS --
As the Indian Airlines hijacking entered its sixth day Wednesday , growing attention is turning to the Taliban , the Islamic movement that rules most of Afghanistan but has been scorned by the world .
India , which actively supports an armed opposition to the Taliban and applauds the United States for persuading the Security Council to punish Afghanistan with sanctions , is suddenly full of praise for the group .
India 's foreign minister , Jaswant Singh , facing a political calamity if the drama ends in tragedy , has publicly thanked the Taliban for their cooperation .
The Taliban leaders , who would have preferred U.N. mediation -- a course vehemently opposed by India , which prefers to deal directly with the hijackers -- have nevertheless smoothed the way for an Indian negotiating team and have allowed international relief experts to set up an emergency center at the airfield near the Taliban 's spiritual headquarters in Kandahar .
They have arranged to clean and guard the plane but not in ways that would antagonize the hijackers .
The Taliban 's foreign minister , Wakil Ahmed Muttawakil , said in an interview Wednesday that his government was treating the hijacking as a strictly humanitarian issue and that this case had nothing to do with Islamic solidarity , even though the hijackers , whose identities remain something of a mystery , are thought to be Muslims .
He also said that the Taliban were not looking for praise or gratitude abroad .
Experts on the region say that there is no certainty that the militantly Islamic Taliban fighters , who run a loosely organized government at best , will be able to significantly improve their reputation through their management of this unexpected crisis -- or that a hostile world will accord them any longterm goodwill when it is over .
Their image remains one of a medieval theocracy that denies both men and women basic rights and seems unable to develop the country or educate and feed its people .
`` The world , for the most part , has basically been on a campaign for the last couple of years to isolate the Taliban , '' said Paula Newberg , a consultant to the United Nations in the region who has also written studies on Afghanistan and Kashmir for the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington .
`` Afghanistan has become an empty hole for them . ''
The United States , demanding that the Taliban turn over Osama bin Laden , a Saudi -born militant wanted in the United States on charges of complicity in the bombing of two U.S. embassies in Africa last year , not only imposed its own sanctions on Afghanistan but led a successful campaign to add an international embargo .
The embargo , coincidentally , prohibits most air travel to and from Afghanistan .
Because of the embargo , many already poor and malnourished Afghans , battered by decades of civil war , are enduring extra hardship this winter , some relief organizations say .
Meanwhile , almost all U.S. contacts with the country have been severed , and Afghanistan 's U.N. seat is held by an exiled leader who is not even part of the opposition forces fighting in the country 's northeast .
`` Because of this policy of isolation , the number of contacts , the knowledge anyone has of who within Afghanistan is capable of doing what is very limited , '' Ms. Newberg said .
`` This is what you get when you impose sanctions on an already isolated regime . ''
Hostility toward the Taliban , albeit for differing reasons , has made unlikely allies of India , Iran , Russia , the United States , the European Union and several Central Asian governments .
All these countries see Afghanistan as a dangerous haven for Islamic terrorism .
In the region , only Pakistan -- whose Inter Services Intelligence organization , or factions of it , still aid the Taliban -- has recognized the Taliban government .
`` Now everybody is saying , the Pakistanis should be exercising their influence on the Taliban -- something they have been trying to persuade the Pakistanis not to do for the last two years , '' Ms. Newberg said .
`` The Americans have been on the path to try to get Pakistan to de-recognize the Taliban , while the Pakistanis say they could be a conduit for others . ''
Robert Oakley , a former U.S. ambassador to Pakistan and a State Department counterterrorism expert , said the concerted attacks on the Taliban miss some points about the nature of the Islamic jihadists , or holy warriors , whom they are accused of harboring or training .
`` The Taliban are Afghans , '' he said , `` but the terrorists are jihadist .
The cause is important , but the nationality is irrelevant .
Call them Pakistanis , or Afghans or Kashmiris , Tajiks or Uzbeks -- it does n't make any difference because they do n't think of themselves that way . ''
Oakley draws two analogies .
He sees the Islamic holy war as a cause for Muslims not unlike the Spanish Civil War in the 1930s was for the European left and others opposed to the rule of Francisco Franco .
`` Obviously , Afghanistan is a safe haven in the way Lebanon once was 20 years ago for all the terrorists because there is no strong central government , '' he said .
`` They can hide out and they are able to appeal in various ways to Islamic solidarity . ''
`` Everybody 's interests would be served , including India 's and Pakistan 's , if they could work together to throttle this disparate group that 's spreading all over Central Asia and up into the Caucasus , '' he said .
Instead , he added , India and some officials in the United States use the issue to isolate not only Afghanistan but also Pakistan .
This approach also suits the Russians , now trying to convince the world that Islamic terrorism is the reason for Moscow 's military campaign in the separatist region of Chechnya , where there are reports of links to bin Laden 's holy warriors .
Shiite Iran , opposed to the Sunni Taliban for religious , ethnic and strategic reasons , generally backs the punishment of Afghanistan , although in recent days the Iranians have revived calls for more talks with the Taliban to end the Afghan civil war .
At the Council on Foreign Relations , Richard Murphy , a former assistant secretary of state for the Near East , said that the Islamic terrorist threat may be exaggerated .
As a nation , he said , `` we have tended pretty consistently to hype Islamic terrorism . ''
It used to be the Palestinians , he said , now it is the Taliban and the militants they harbor .
He questions the Afghans ' staying power , a theme now appearing in the writing of some Pakistani commentators critical of their country 's links with the Taliban .
`` Despite the high drama of Chechnya and now this hijacking , '' Murphy said , `` I think the Taliban is on the decline .
They just are n't satisfying anyone inside the country . ''
He described them as a rough , ill-educated group `` willing to punish their own people . ''
`` The Taliban is kind of falling from its own weight , '' he said .
