Within hours of hearing that their embassies in Kenya and Tanzania had been bombed last week , Americans once again witnessed an all-too-familiar ritual : The president , somber and stern , delivering a warning to the attackers that they would be tracked down and punished for their crimes .
`` No matter how long it takes or where it takes us , '' President Clinton told the nation after the bombings , which killed more than 250 people , `` we will pursue terrorists until the cases are solved and justice is done . ''
But while such hostility may make the nation feel momentarily better , the truth of the matter is that terrorists who attack U.S. targets overseas are seldom apprehended and punished .
During the past 15 years , beginning with the brazen car-bomb attack on the U.S. Embassy in Beirut that killed 16 people in April 1983 , only a handful of perpetrators have been brought to justice -- even fewer to courts in the United States .
In some instances , investigators have a good idea of who the criminals are and still , because of diplomatic and sovereignty concerns , are not able to bring them to the United States for trial .
`` At the end of the day , there is a gap between the rhetoric and the action , '' said Edward Djerejian , director of the James A. Baker III Institute for Public Policy at Rice University in Houston and a former U.S. ambassador to Lebanon , Syria and Israel .
`` The goal is to narrow that gap by crafting policies to enable us to more effectively identify , apprehend and bring to justice these terrorists .
That 's the real challenge . ''
The difficulty is compounded , Djerejian said , because in addition to having to conduct an investigation in a foreign country , U.S. authorities are more often than not hunting individuals who are being sheltered and aided by `` sponsor '' nations , which help culprits obtain passports , identity documents and money , and provide safe haven .
Historically , the United States considers nations such as Iran , Iraq , Libya , Pakistan and Syria as countries that sponsor anti- American terrorism .
By contrast , Djerejian said , major acts of terrorism that have occurred on American soil -- the 1995 bombing of the Oklahoma City Federal Building and the 1993 attack on the World Trade Center in New York City -- have been fairly quickly solved and the perpetrators tried , convicted and sentenced .
`` We have a good record of catching terrorists here because we 're on our own turf , because we do n't have diplomatic difficulties and because people like -LRB- Oklahoma City bomber Timothy -RRB- McVeigh had no support , '' Djerejian said .
But consider the scorecard on some of the more serious attacks on foreign soil in the last 15 years : -- In April 1983 , 16 people died when a car bomb driven to the front of the U.S. Embassy in Beirut exploded .
Although fundamentalist Muslims , including members of the Lebanese Party of God , a Syrian and Iranian backed terrorist group led by Imad Mughniyah , are suspected , there have been no arrests or convictions .
-- A few months later , in October 1983 , 241 people died in a car bomb attack at the U.S. Marine barracks in Beirut .
The same groups as in the previous attack are suspected , but to date there have been no arrests or convictions .
-- In June 1985 , U.S. Marine Robert Stethem , a passenger on Trans World Airlines Flight 847 , is killed by Party of God terrorists who have hijacked the plane .
Four people , including Mughniyah , are charged in a sealed indictment in the United States and one of them , Mohammed Al Hamadi , is arrested and convicted in Germany for Stethem 's murder .
There were no convictions in U.S. courts .
-- In October 1985 , an elderly , American named Leon Klinghoffer was shot and dumped overboard during the hijacking of the cruise ship Achille Lauro in the Mediterranean Sea .
Four Palestinians were later arrested after U.S. Navy jets intercepted an airliner and forced it to land at a U.S. base in Sicily .
After their arrest , President Reagan declared , `` You can run , but you ca n't hide . ''
The four were convicted in an Italian court , but the alleged mastermind , Abul Abbas , was released .
-- After Pan Am Flight 103 was blown up in the sky over Lockerbie , Scotland , in December 1988 , killing 281 people , President -elect Bush pledged to `` seek hard and punish firmly , decisively , those who did this if you can ever find them . ''
Yet 10 years later , two men who have been indicted in the United States and who are on the FBI 's most-wanted list remain in Libya with a $ 4 million bounty on their heads .
-- Despite President Clinton 's promise that `` the perpetrators of this cowardly act '' will be apprehended , there have been no arrests and convictions for the March 1995 shooting of two U.S. diplomats in Karachi , Pakistan .
-- The same is true of two bombings in Saudi Arabia in November 1995 and June 1996 , when a U.S. -run military training center in Riyadh , Saudi Arabia , and a military barracks in Dhahran were attacked , resulting in the deaths of 7 and 19 people , respectively .
There are limited , and mostly ineffective , tools available to the United States to track down and arrest suspected terrorists , said Brian Jenkins , a terrorism expert with Kroll Associates , an international security organization .
But before getting started , he said , one must clear a major obstacle , determining who is responsible .
In some cases , like the shootings of four Houston oil company workers last year in Karachi , he said , the United States just does n't know with certainty who did it .
In other cases , U.S. investigators know who the individuals are , but do n't have enough evidence to indict them .
And then there are suspects against whom there is sufficient and compelling evidence , but who simply cannot be found .
Once an individual is identified , Jenkins said , there are , basically five possible tools available to try and bring that person to justice : If the person is being sheltered by a `` sponsor '' nation , then sanctions can be applied to that nation ; assassination could be an option if it were legal ; military retaliation could be considered ; culprits can be captured and brought to trial ; and ransoms can be offered to ferret out suspects .
`` The problem is that all of these , individually and collectively , are very poor instruments , '' Jenkins said .
`` The truth is that we really do n't have the tools and the means to wage war against terrorism . ''
But , Jenkins said , U.S. efforts to track down and apprehend terrorists have improved somewhat in the past 10 years largely due to laws allowing the FBI to become involved in the investigation and government offers of millions of dollars in rewards , both for catching terrorists , and preventing attacks .
The United States is offering $ 2 million in the embassy bombings in Africa .
`` Slowly things are changing , '' Jenkins said .
`` Big sums of money on the table help . ''
XXXX END OF STORY
