A hijacked Indian jetliner with 155 hostages on board remained in a perilous limbo on a tarmac in Afghanistan Sunday as efforts to end the crisis on its third day bogged down in a swirl of recriminations and charges that seemed to reprise the bitter , decades -old feud between India and Pakistan over Kashmir .
Pakistan accused India of staging the hijacking .
India hinted that Pakistan might be behind it .
Officials of the Taliban , who control most of Afghanistan , said they would not negotiate with the hijackers .
And while Russia called for a meeting of the U.N. Security Council , India signaled that it did not want international mediation .
At the United Nations , a senior diplomatic official told Reuters that Indian representatives would soon be sent to Kandahar , in southern Afghanistan , where the plane was on the ground .
But the official refused to say whether the envoys would try to negotiate with the hijackers .
As the standoff continued , with hijackers threatening to blow up the Indian Airlines A300 Airbus and Taliban soldiers surrounding it at a remote airfield , there were no negotiations Sunday over the captors ' demands for the release from Indian jails of a Pakistani Islamic cleric , Maulana Masood Azhar , and several men described as fighters for Kashmiri independence from Indian rule .
A U.N. official in Afghanistan , Erick de Mul , spoke for an hour by radio to the hijackers Sunday , but succeeded in obtaining the release of only one passenger .
The hostage , an Indian man suffering from diabetes and needing medical treatment , was freed in what the hijackers called a `` goodwill gesture . ''
The hijackers , who are known to have killed one hostage , had released 27 other passengers -- women , children and elderly men -- in a stopover in the United Arab Emirates on Friday , leaving 155 hostages at the mercy of what were believed to be five captors armed with pistols , grenades and knives .
The hijacking odyssey began Friday on a flight from Katmandu , Nepal , to New Delhi , and took the plane across India , Pakistan , Afghanistan and the Persian Gulf before settling for the weekend in Kandahar .
It has reopened old wounds between India and Pakistan , which have fought three wars since the Asian subcontinent gained independence from Britain in 1947 , two of them over the divided Himalayan state of Kashmir .
On Saturday , Pakistan and India both condemned this hijacking and all acts of terrorism .
Sunday , each was pointing a finger of accusation at the other .
Pakistan 's foreign minister , Abdul Sattar , suggested that India 's secret intelligence service had staged the hijacking as part of an effort to malign Pakistan 's new military government .
He charged that since Oct. 12 , when the army ousted Pakistan 's elected government , India has tried to isolate Pakistan 's new government internationally .
`` Perhaps they 're disappointed at the failure of their efforts , '' The Associated Press reported Sattar as saying .
`` Perhaps the government of India manufactured another incident in pursuit of their aim of maligning Pakistan internationally .
The possibility can no longer be ignored that the incident involves a preconceived design by a foreign intelligence organization . ''
In New Delhi , an Indian official hinted that Pakistan might be responsible because , he said , the hijackers had originated in Pakistan and they and other militants have repeatedly sought the release of Azhar , who has been in an Indian jail since 1994 for encouraging a separatist revolt in Kashmir .
India 's foreign minister , Jaswant Singh , was noncommittal in response to questions at a news conference about the possibility of negotiations and about the hijackers ' demands .
`` It 's not a yes-or-no answer to which I can address myself , '' The Associated Press reported him as saying .
`` I will exercise all options toward the aim of ensuring the well-being of passengers . ''
But he also insisted that the hijackers had arrived in Nepal on Friday aboard a Pakistan International Airlines flight from the southern Pakistani city of Karachi -- an assertion that Pakistani officials denied .
And Singh noted pointedly that the hijackers and other militants had sought the release of Azhar .
Muslim secessionists have waged a long insurgency in the Indian -held portion of Kashmir , demanding either independence or union with Islamic Pakistan .
Azhar went to India in 1992 to join the struggle and was arrested two years later .
His group , Harakat ul- Mujahedeen , formerly called , Harakat ul- Ansar , kidnapped six Western tourists in 1995 in an unsuccessful attempt to win the release of Azhar and other jailed insurgents ; last October , the group claimed responsibility for a grenade that killed three people in Kashmir .
On the tarmac in Kandahar , the shades of the plane were down Monday morning , the engines were running and the hostages were reported to be suffering in deterioriating conditions , with the air on board hot and fetid and many people sick , Mohammed Khiber , a civil aviation official , told The Associated Press .
At the United Nations , Russia 's first deputy ambassador , Gennady Gatilov , was quoted by the Russian news agency Tass as urging that a special session of the Security Council be held , perhaps Monday , on the hijacking , which he called a `` dangerous situation for the region . ''
But a senior U.N. official said India did not want international mediation .
