NEW DELHI , India --
Hijackers holding 154 hostages in an Indian Airlines jet at an airport in Afghanistan dropped demands Wednesday that India hand over $ 200 million and the body of a slain militant , Indian officials said .
But the hijackers continued to insist that India release a jailed Pakistani Muslim cleric and 35 other people whom the Indian government considers terrorists opposed to Indian rule in Kashmir .
Representatives of Afghanistan 's ruling militia , the Taliban -- itself a fundamentalist Muslim group that has been criticized for harboring terrorists -- impressed on the hijackers that they had violated the conditions of landing in Afghanistan by adding the demands for money and the body , the Taliban 's foreign minister , Wakil Ahmed Muttawakil , told reporters Wednesday in Kandahar , the Afghan city where the plane is parked .
The increasingly important role played by the Taliban in efforts to end the six-day -old hostage crisis became even more intriguingly apparent Wednesday .
Like most countries , India does not have diplomatic relations with the Taliban , who control most of Afghanistan and have been aggressively seeking international recognition as the country 's legitimate government .
But Indian officials continued to praise the Taliban effusively Wednesday .
`` Taliban continues to play an extremely cooperative and constructive role , '' India 's foreign minister , Jaswant Singh , said at a news conference here .
Even so , Indian officials were noncommittal about whether they would be willing to make a deal with the hijackers and free some of the jailed militants .
Parliamentary Affairs Minister Pramod Mahajan minimized the significance of the hijackers ' decision to reduce their demands .
`` We are taking the demands in totality , '' Mahajan said after a cabinet meeting .
`` We are not counting the number of demands or the number of people they want us to release . ''
India 's kind words for the Taliban may not buy its cooperation indefinitely .
Muttawakil seemed to be telling India not too subtly Wednesday that it needed to compromise with the hijackers , and quickly , to end the crisis .
`` If the two sides are unable to solve their problems soon , the Taliban will force the hijackers to leave Afghanistan , '' he said .
The hostages ' terrifying odyssey began last Friday , when five or six hijackers took control of the plane during a scheduled flight from Katmandu , Nepal , to New Delhi .
The Indian government has come in for vituperative criticism from newspapers and relatives of some hostages , most of whom are Indian citizens , for the lax security measures that allowed the hijackers , armed with grenades , pistols and knives , to board the plane .
The government has also been taken to task for allowing the plane to leave India after landing in the northern Indian city of Amritsar .
On Wednesday officials released excerpts of exchanges between the pilot and air traffic controllers that they said explained the decision to allow the plane to proceed on to Pakistan .
According to the transcripts , the pilot said -- mistakenly as it turned out -- that the hijackers had AK -47s and had already killed four people and would kill more unless the plane was allowed to take off .
From Pakistan , the plane flew to the United Arab Emirates , where 27 hostages were released and the body of a passenger who had been killed was unloaded .
The plane then landed in Kandahar on Saturday .
The hijackers have said that they want the Pakistani Muslim cleric , 31-year -old Masood Azhar , and 35 others jailed in India released .
Azhar , a leader of Harakat ul- Ansar , a group that is on the U.S. State Department 's list of terrorist organizations , was active in opposing Indian rule of Kashmir , a predominantly Muslim area in the Himalayas .
The State Department 's 1998 report on terrorism said the group , which now goes by the name Harakat ul- Mujahedeen , had operated training camps in Afghanistan .
Militants have made three violent attempts to secure Azhar 's release since he was jailed in 1994 .
In one case , a Westerner who was kidnapped was beheaded .
Indian Airlines officials said there are still 154 hostages on board the plane , including 54 women and five children under the age of 12 .
Conditions aboard the plane Wednesday were more comfortable than on Tuesday , when the electrical power broke down for hours , Indian officials said .
The hostages were receiving medical care and medicine , and the toilets were being cleaned , they said .
`` Food and water is constantly being made available and is supplied on demand , '' said Singh , India 's foreign minister .
