NEW DELHI , India --
As more than 150 hostages faced a fifth claustrophobic night of captivity on board an Indian Airlines jet , the hijackers ratcheted up the pressure on the Indian government by demanding that India pay them $ 200 million and release 35 jailed militants , India 's foreign minister , Jaswant Singh , said on Tuesday night .
Not only did the hijackers pose these new demands on Tuesday , but they continued to reject India 's request that women and children be allowed to leave the plane being held at the airport in Kandahar , Afghanistan , Singh said .
He was cryptic about India 's response to the latest demands , though India is clearly concerned that giving in would encourage further terrorist acts .
`` Let the country and the international community reflect on these demands , '' he said Tuesday night , after a Cabinet meeting called by Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee .
In recent days , the clamor from distraught relatives of the hostages , most of whom are Indian citizens , has grown for the government to take decisive action to end the crisis .
Their anxieties were aggravated on Tuesday when the jetliner 's power supply went dead for 12 hours , leaving the passengers to breathe stale , unventilated air until an Indian engineer repaired the problem .
There were reports that the highjackers permitted guards from the Taliban militia , which controls most of Afghanistan , to open pipes of the plane 's toilets to the outside and to run a tube into the plane to help draw in fresh air .
The Taliban have also been supplying food and water to the plane 's occupants .
In Geneva , the International Committee of the Red Cross said it had sent a medical team t the airport and had distributed medicine to the hostages .
The hijackers ' new list of demands also included return of the body of Sajjid Afghani , a militant opposed to Indian rule of Kashmir who was killed by Indian security forces earlier this year .
The hijackers ' only previously known demand had been for the release of the Pakistani Muslim cleric , Maulana Masood Azhar .
Both Azhar and Afghani were active in the militant group , Harkat ul- Ansar , and had been arrested in 1994 and imprisoned in the Indian -held portion of the Himalayan territory of Kashmir .
Afghani was killed earlier this year during what Indian authorities said was a failed jailbreak .
The identities of the hijackers themselves remained unclear , but from their demands they appear to violently oppose secular , but predominantly Hindu India 's rule of the predominantly Muslim territory of Kashmir and favor either a separate Kashmiri state or a United Nations -sponsored plebiscite that would allow Kashmir to join Islamic Pakistan .
At a news conference on Tuesday , Singh said the hijackers owe their allegiance to Harkat ul- Ansar , which he described as a terrorist organization founded and nurtured in Pakistan .
Indian officials held their second day of negotiations on Tuesday with the hijackers over a cockpit radio in Kandahar , where the plane landed after first flying from Nepal , to India , to Pakistan and then to the United Arab Emirates .
The gunmen seized control of the plane on Friday after it took off on a scheduled flight from Katmandu , the capital of Nepal , to New Delhi .
Indian authorities have been harshly criticized by some commentators for allowing the plane to leave Amritsar in northern India for Lahore , Pakistan .
The Taliban , a fundamentalist Muslim militia that has been seeking international recognition as Afghanistan 's government , has gone to great lengths to distance itself from the hijackers .
Its officials have vowed not only that they will not give safe harbor to the hijackers , but that they will storm the plane if the hijackers begin killing hostages again .
The Taliban had wanted the United Nations to negotiate with the hijackers , but India insisted that its own representatives handle the talks , U.N. officials confirmed .
The hijackers have already fatally stabbed one hostage .
On Sunday , they unloaded the murdered man 's body and released 27 captives , most of them women and children , during a stop over in Dubai , United Arab Emirates .
The Taliban foreign minister , Abdul Wakil Muttawakil , said at a news conference on Tuesday that the direct negotiations between Indian officials and the hijackers had as yet yielded little that is encouraging .
`` The talks are in medium condition , '' he said .
`` No progress has been made so far . ''
Though India has no diplomatic relations with the Taliban , Singh praised Taliban authorities for fully cooperating with Indian negotiators .
While the crisis dragged on , it was not the longest-lasting hijacking episode .
On July 23 , 1968 , members of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine diverted an Israeli flight from Rome to Tel Aviv and then Algiers , releasing the last hostages 40 days later .
