NEW DELHI , India --
India intensified its efforts to blame Pakistan for the Indian Airlines hijacking , announcing on Thursday that four accomplices had been seized in Bombay .
India said that the four men had identified the five hijackers as Pakistanis and admitted that Pakistan sponsored the hijacking .
Home Minister Lal Krishna Advani said at a press conference that the statements of the four reported accomplices -- an Indian , two Pakistanis and a Nepali -- and other `` tell-tale pointers '' conclusively established Pakistan 's role in the hijacking .
The Airbus was commandeered as it flew from Katmandu , Nepal , to New Delhi on Dec. 24 with 178 passengers and 11 crew members on board .
`` Deny howsoever it may , Pakistan is neck deep in this dirty game of hijacking , '' Advani said .
Pakistan has repeatedly and vehemently denied the charges leveled by Indian officials , including Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee , who appealed to the world 's major nations on Monday to isolate Pakistan as a terrorist state .
Pakistani officials said again Thursday thatan had nothing to do with the hijacking .
On Tuesday , Pakistan 's military ruler , Gen. Pervez Musharraf , accused Vajpayee of attempting to smear Pakistan in the hope of diverting attention from the mounting domestic criticism of his government 's handling of the hostage crisis .
The hijacking , which ended on New Year 's Eve when India traded three jailed militants for the hostages , has brought the already strained relations between India and Pakistan to a new low .
The hijackers told hostages that they were fighting for a Kashmir independent of Indian rule .
Both India and Pakistan lay claim to Kashmir , a Himalayan land that lies between them and that has been the source of the bitterest conflict between the two nuclear-armed neighbors .
Vajpayee , who leads the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party , is facing harsh criticism at home for swapping hostages for militants that his government regards as terrorists .
Rajendra Singh , the chief of his party 's parent organization , the Rashtriya Swayamsewak Sangh , said in an interview with the group 's weekly newspaper that India 's release of the militants showed the `` cowardice '' of Hindu society .
The Hindu nationalists , who have always taken a hard line on Pakistan and terrorism , are now under intense pressure to prove that India is not a soft target .
Asked what the government planned to do about what it claims is a Pakistani -sponsored hijacking , Advani said , `` The government will be considering all possibilities insofar as Pakistan is concerned . ''
He declined to elaborate .
Advani offered the following version of events : On the fifth night of the crisis , with the plane in Afghanistan , India intercepted a message from the hijackers , who had been in constant touch with their Pakistani handlers through an accomplice in Pakistan .
This accomplice , in turn , had gotten in touch with the hijackers ' main co-conspirator in Bombay , an Indian named Abdul Latif , Advani said .
Latif -- allegedly recruited by Pakistani intelligence and trained at camps in Pakistan and Afghanistan -- was instructed to tell a correspondent for an international television network in London that the hijackers would blow up the plane unless their demand for release of militants was met .
Indian authorities tracked down Latif in Bombay , along with two Pakistanis -- Mohammed Rehan of Karachi and Mohammed Iqbal of Multan -- and a Nepali , Yusuf Nepali .
Advani said all four were accomplices in the hijacking and agents of Pakistan 's military intelligence agency .
Advani said the four accomplices identified the hijackers -- all Pakistanis -- and provided photographs of them .
He said Indian officials have since shown the photos to crew members and passengers who were on the hijacked plane .
Advani claimed that the released hostages have identified the masked men and connected them with the code names they were known by on the flight .
But the commander of the hijacked plane , Capt. Devi Sharan , said Thursday night in a telephone interview that he was never shown the photographs .
And if he had been , he said he did not think he could have identified the hijackers .
`` They were wearing masks , '' he said .
`` I cannot recognize them . ''
Advani identified the hijackers as Ibrahim Athar of Bahawalpur , known as `` Chief . ''
He said the three from Karachi were Shahid Akhtar Sayed , called `` Doctor , '' Sunny Ahmed Qazi , known as `` Burger , '' and Mistri Zahoor Ibrahim , called `` Bhola . ''
The fifth , Shakir from Sukkur City , was known as `` Shankar . ''
Advani also said that the alleged conspirators confessed under interrogation that the hijacking had been an operation of Pakistan 's intelligence agency in league with Harkat ul- Ansar , a Kashmiri nationalist group that was put on the U.S. State Department 's list of terrorist groups in 1997 .
The militant whose freedom was most determinedly sought by the hijackers , Masood Azhar , had been a leader of Harkat ul- Ansar until India jailed him in 1994 .
According to the Indian account , the hijackers took at least three trips this year to Katmandu with their Bombay accomplices -- on Nov. 1 , Dec. 1 and Dec. 17 -- to set up the hijacking , traveling by bus , train and plane .
Advani declined to comment on the whereabouts of the hijackers .
`` This is an area that is being constantly monitored , '' he said .
`` It may not be proper for me to say . ''
Jaswant Singh , India 's minister of external affairs , had asserted on Saturday that the hs were headed for Quetta , Pakistan .
The hijackers and the freed militants were last seen Friday as they sped away from the airport in Kandahar , Afghanistan , where the hijacked plane was parked when the crisis ended .
The Associated Press reported that at a news conference on Thursday , Azhar said the hijackers had released him and the other two freed men on the road to Pakistan about 25 minutes after they left the airport .
On parting , Azhar said the still-masked hijackers embraced him , weeping , and said , `` We have done this for the cause of Islam . ''
Azhar said he and the other two militants had gone to Pakistan .
At the press conference Thursday afternoon , Advani said there were other clues to what he called `` Pakistan 's complicity in this diabolic drama . ''
He said a car with a Pakistani embassy license plate had come to the Katmandu airport before the hijacked flight took off and that three Pakistani officials had visited the departure lounge .
`` Our people noted it , '' he said .
He said that as many as 33 of the 36 prisoners whom the hijackers wanted released were Pakistanis , and he noted that the freed militants had reportedly turned up in Pakistan .
Advani also noted that the hijackers chose to land in Lahore , Pakistan , after they took control of the plane in Indian airspace .
But he glossed over the fact that airport authorities initially refused to let the plane land .
Sharan , the plane 's captain , said in an interview earlier this week that Pakistani authorities only relented and allowed the plane to land after he nearly crashed it onto a road crowded with people .
Relations between India and Pakistan , which conducted tit-for-tat nuclear tests in May 1998 , briefly improved last February when Vajpayee took a bus to Lahore , where he and Pakistan 's prime minister , Nawaz Sharif , promised to settle their differences through negotiation .
But relations soured this summer during a small , deadly confrontation over Kashmir and worsened further in October , when the military overthrew Sharif 's government .
All talks between the two countries have ground to a halt .
