NEW DELHI , India --
A day after India accused Pakistan of sponsoring the hijacking of an Indian Airlines jet , Pakistani officials said Friday that the charges were baseless and that India was making them in an attempt to persuade other nations to declare Pakistan a terrorist state .
Echoing statements made by the military ruler of Pakistan , Gen. Pervez Musharraf , one of the general 's close advisers said he and the general believed that it was possible that India had engineered the hijacking in an effort to malign Pakistan .
`` What kind of absurd objective would Pakistan achieve by supporting such an incident ? '' asked the adviser , Javed Jabbar , who is also a close friend of Musharraf .
`` Are we bereft of reason ?
Why would we give something to India that they could use to distort Pakistan 's image , disinform the world about what we are as a people and demonize us ? ''
For more than half a century , India and Pakistan have been fighting over Kashmir , a territory that lies between them .
And the hijacking has turned into another bitter and spectacular episode in that conflict , one that has brought out the extraordinary levels of distrust between the countries created from the British Indian empire in 1947 .
On its face , the hijacking would seem to have been carried out by militants who are fighting against predominantly Hindu India 's rule of mostly Muslim Kashmir .
The hijackers sought and won the release of three anti- India militants in exchange for freeing more than 150 hostages .
But when it comes to the bloody dispute over Kashmir , little is as it seems .
Over the years , the intelligence agencies of both India and Pakistan have accumulated daunting powers , and each country routinely accuses the other of being behind acts of violence in Kashmir , as well as in India and Pakistan .
In just the last week , a bomb blew up in a vegetable market in Srinagar , the summer capital of the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir , killing more than a dozen people .
In Hyderabad , Pakistan , a bomb exploded in a crowded marketplace , wounding 18 people .
More than 25,000 people have died in the conflict .
But the hijacking , a single dramatic event , has grabbed the world 's attention in a way that the everyday death and destruction have not .
Other countries have watched in dismay as these two nuclear-armed nations have gone at each other 's throats .
On Monday , Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee of India said Pakistan had backed the hijacking .
The next day , Musharraf said , `` At the outset , I had a suspicion that the hijacking could be a big drama , and the statement of the Indian prime minister confirms that India had staged this drama to give Pakistan a bad name . ''
India said on Thursday that it had the smoking gun to prove Pakistan 's role .
Home Minister Lal Krishna Advani said that authorities had seized four agents of the Pakistani military intelligence agency in Bombay .
Advani also said that the four men had identified the five hijackers as Pakistanis and had admitted that Pakistan was behind the whole episode .
But Jabbar said he believed that India 's evidence might be fabricated and raised questions for India to answer .
He asked how grenades and guns got onto an aircraft of India 's national carrier , which was hijacked when it left the airport in Katmandu , Nepal , on Dec. 24 with 178 passengers and 11 crew members on board .
He wanted to know why the Indian government allowed the plane to take off for Pakistan after it had stopped in Amritsar , India .
And he asked why the Indians had made a deal with the hijackers and had not insisted that they first take off their masks and identify themselves .
Jabbar also said Pakistan had initially refused to allow the plane to land in Lahore and relented only after the plane , dangerously low on fuel , nearly crashed .
That account was confirmed by the commander of the plane , Capt. Devi Sharan .
`` We did not want that flight in our territory , '' Jabbar said .
`` Who would want it ? ''
A spokesman for the Pakistani Foreign Ministry also enumerated for reporters in Islamabad what he described as unbelievable Indian assertions .
He said that it was not credible that the Pakistani embassy in Katmandu would use one of its own cars and that `` three officials '' would publicly proceed to the departure lounge before the plane had departed if they were connected with the hijacking .
The spokesman was also skeptical that India had managed to obtain photographs of the hijackers from their reported accomplices .
`` It is curious , '' the spokesman said , `` that the hijackers , who were not seen throughout the hijacking drama , would have left their passport-size photographs with the accomplices to be handed over the Indians on demand . ''
Jabbar had no apologies for Pakistan 's decision to allow a released militant , Masood Azhar , to return to Pakistan and openly inflame passions for the fight in Kashmir .
Azhar , a Pakistani leader of the Harkat ul- Ansar , a Kashmiri nationalist group that the United States considers a terrorist organization , had been imprisoned in India since 1994 .
He was never convicted of a crime .
Some Indian commentators have said that if Pakistan was serious about helping India find the hijackers , who may well be in Pakistan , its authorities would have questioned Azhar .
Jabbar disagreed .
He said India had violated `` all norms of law and justice '' by imprisoning Azhar for six years without finding him guilty of a crime in a court of law .
`` They have not been able to convict and sentence him , '' Jabbar said .
`` What are we supposed to do ?
He has not committed any crime on Pakistani territory . ''
