NEW DELHI , India --
Will he or wo n't he ?
Should he or should n't he ?
Those questions are the talk of the capitals of India and Pakistan as President Clinton -- who has announced that next month he will become the first president since Jimmy Carter to visit India -- makes the excruciatingly difficult decision about whether he will also stop in Pakistan , where the military seized power in a coup four months ago .
The downside is steep either way he calls it .
India is unequivocally opposed to such a visit .
Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee has warned that the public here will be deeply offended if Clinton goes .
Likewise , Pakistan is prepared to take great umbrage if Clinton does not pay his respects there .
Pakistani officials warn that his absence could generate a vicious anti- American backlash .
There is a risk in the current angry , charged atmosphere -- one in which both sides have dug in their heels on some of the most contentious issues -- that Clinton 's trip will stir resentments in both countries and leave peace just as distant as ever .
The last serious attempt at a peace initiative ended disastrously .
A year ago Monday , the prime ministers of India and Pakistan held a news conference in Lahore , Pakistan , and promised to work out their differences at the bargaining table .
But soon the Pakistani army apparently supported an infiltration of forces into the Indian -held part of Kashmir , a Himalayan territory that both countries claim , provoking an armed conflict there last summer that replaced the nascent good will between the two nations with bitter mistrust .
If Clinton is hoping to persuade India to return to negotiations with Pakistan , he is likely to be disappointed .
Once burned and twice shy , India is unwilling to talk until it is convinced that Pakistan is no longer sponsoring attacks on Indian forces in Kashmir , which India sees as terrorism .
The Indians contend that a presidential visit to Pakistan would legitimize and prolong a military dictatorship that they say is using Islamic militants to intensify its proxy war against India in Kashmir .
Every few days , several Indian soldiers and policemen are killed in Kashmir by militants , which India says is evidence of Pakistan 's continuing bad faith .
Some experts on the region also worry that Clinton is overestimating the power of his personality to get the two sides talking again .
`` The president may not get the message how committed the Pakistani army leadership is to fomenting violent insurgency in Kashmir and how readily Pakistani leaders in the past have told Americans what they want to hear , only to take advantage of their naivete later , '' said George Perkovich , a security analyst and the author of `` India 's Nuclear Bomb '' -LRB- University of California , 1999 -RRB- .
The military government has not given ground on the major American concerns : a timetable for the return of democracy , a crackdown on terrorists operating in Pakistan and help in persuading Pakistan 's allies who control much of Afghanistan , the Taliban , to turn over Osama bin Laden , the terrorism suspect who is believed to be living there .
And the Harakat ul- Mujahedeen , or Fighters Movement , is still functioning in Pakistan .
American officials say the group , which is on the State Department 's list of terrorist organizations , was behind the hijacking of an Indian Airlines plane in December , Asked about the group , Javed Jabbar , a close friend and adviser to Gen. Pervez Musharraf , Pakistan 's military ruler , said : `` The acts of particular individuals who may do certain things do not necessarily reflect a particular organization 's conscious policy .
To focus on that while ignoring the state terrorism of 500,000 Indian troops in Kashmir is so disparate . ''
Pakistani officials and some experts argue that a Clinton visit to Pakistan is essential if he is serious about trying to further the cause of peace because there are two adversaries and it makes no sense to talk to only one of them .
Pakistan 's military leaders , like their civilian predecessors , have sought to put Kashmir at the center of the international agenda .
Earlier this month , the general went to Muzaffarabad , capital of the Pakistani -held part of Kashmir , and gave a fiery speech in support of the militants fighting Indian rule on the other side of the `` line of control '' that divides the territory .
But the Indians recently ruled out once again the proposal long put forward by Pakistan to have the United States or the United Nations mediate the conflict .
And Clinton said he would not press for that without an invitation from both sides .
Despite the many difficulties , Stephen P. Cohen , a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution , said Clinton should open lines of communication to the general that would be important if India and Pakistan end up in an armed conflict .
`` The Indians will resent this , '' Cohen said , `` but they should resent even more the long delay in going to their country .
Hopefully they 'll be polite hosts . ''
Pakistani officials and intellectuals warn that a presidential snub of their country , an old Cold War ally , would enrage Islamic militants and weaken secular-minded modernizers in the army , making conflict with India more likely .
`` It would certainly strengthen those forces in our society that are extremist and skeptical of the United States , '' Jabbar said .
The Pakistanis ' willingness to brandish the specter of a nuclear-armed Pakistan threatened by rising Islamic fundamentalism and weakened by a deeply troubled economy irritates Indians , who see it as a kind of blackmail .
But some American diplomats find the specter real and frightening .
`` There 's been an element of rhetorical blackmail , but these concerns are real , '' said a senior administration official .
`` This is a country with a demonstrated nuclear capacity that has increasing concerns about terrorist organizations , about jihad , about sectarian violence . ''
As things stand now , it does not appear likely that the president will collect any easy victory in either country on issues of war and peace .
He has hoped that both countries will sign the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty , a step that Washington says would slow the nuclear arms race here , but neither country seems inclined to do so .
The Hindu nationalist-led government of India , which sought no national consensus before it tested nuclear weapons in May 1998 , insists that it must build just such a consensus now before it signs the treaty .
Nonetheless , Clinton has decided that it is in American interests to engage India , a democracy that is home to one-sixth of humanity , on issues ranging from the environment to trade .
`` It would be stupid of the United States to ignore India 's potential economically , or its role in dealing with global problems , '' said an American diplomat .
`` It would not serve our purpose well if we shunned India or sent it to the gulag of bad-boy nations . ''
Now Clinton will have to make similar calculations about Pakistan .
`` Everyone recognizes that this is a close call , '' said an administration official , who seemed relieved that it was not his call .
