ISLAMABAD , December 25 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Afghan Taliban 's Foreign Minister Maulvi Mutawakil Saturday said the hijackers of an Indian plane were Kashmiri militants who demanded the release of Kashmiri fighters in Indian jails .
Talking to newsmen in southern Afghan city of Kanhahar , Mutawakil said the Taliban authorities have had direct communications with the hijackers for the first time since the Airbus -300 aircraft was hijacked Friday on its flight from Kathmandu , Nepal , to New Delhi .
Previously the hijackers kept forcing the pilot to talk with the authorities of the four airports the plane had landed on its terrifying journey in South Asia and to the Middle East during the past 24 hours .
Akhtar Mansoor , a civil official of the militia , talked with the hijackers , who asked the Taliban to convey their message to the Indian government , according to Mutawakil .
One of the hijackers named Ibrahim also demanded the release of his brother Masood Azhar , who was a journalist .
The Taliban militia have proposed the United Nations to send a delegation to talk with the hijackers so that the militia should not be blamed , said Mutawakil .
The Taliban representative in the United Nations has raised the proposal to the international organization , he added .
`` No one should blame the Taliban for that event , '' he said , adding that they are doing whatever they can to secure the safety of the some 160 people on board .
He said New Delhi has been in contact with the Taliban and asked the latter to take care of the passengers .
India Friday suspected the hijacking has some connection with the alleged terrorist Osama bin Laden , who is now living in Taliban -controlled part of Afghanistan .
However , the Taliban have rejected these allegations .
The hijackers also reiterated that they will not leave Afghanistan and threatened that they will destroy the plane if anybody attempts to approach it .
The hijacked plane , with 185 people on board at the take-off , grounded in the Kandahar airport early Saturday after its landings in India 's Amritsar , Pakistan 's Lahore and the United Arab Emirates ' Dubai .
At the Dubai airbase , 25 women and children were released and a dead body was sent out of the aircraft .
