NEW DELHI , February 28 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The Indian government alleged on Monday that the Taliban authorities in Afghanistan had played a complicit role in the hijacking of an Indian Airlines plane at the end of last year .
Throughout the hijacking incident , the Taliban authorities had `` consistently and clearly had their sympathies with the hijackers and their other supporters and acted accordingly '' even while adopting the attitude of `` correct facilitators , '' Indian External Affairs Minister Jaswant Singh said in a statement tabled in the upper house of parliament .
In the first official comment on the incident by the Indian government , the statement said there was a `` triangular coordination '' between the hijackers , the Taliban , the militant organization Harkat -ul- Mujahedeen -LRB- HUM -RRB- and Pakistan 's intelligence agency , the Inter - Services Intelligence -LRB- ISI -RRB- .
It was the first time for the Indian government to put part of the blame for the hijacking incident on the Taliban authorities .
According to Singh , the Taliban , while dealing with the hijackers , did not press on them to give up their demand for the release of `` terrorists '' jailed in India .
It was also the Taliban 's own decision to give the hijackers and the released `` terrorists '' 10 hours to leave Afghanistan , regardless of India 's explicit request that both the hijackers and the released `` terrorists '' should be treated as criminals in conformity with law , Singh added .
Kandahar was possibly `` the most adverse location '' for India to address the situation after the hijacking occurred , he noted .
He also said the hijacking had once again proved the complicity of Pakistan and of organizations patronized and supported by it , as the interrogation of four HUM operatives in Mumbai subsequently had established that the hijacking was masterminded by the ISI .
Singh went on to defend the Indian government 's decision to trade three jailed `` terrorists '' for hostages on the hijacked plane , claiming that it had been made `` entirely on account of logistical compulsions . ''
The final outcome of the incident that had been achieved was the `` best possible '' in a basket of worst alternatives , he said .
