VIENNA , Austria
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- OPEC nations voted Tuesday to cut crude oil production deeply and maintain the reductions for a year , a decision that could further drive up the cost of driving , flying and shipping products in the United States .
However , economists predicted that the U.S. impact will be moderate , allowing corporations to remain profitable and putting only a minor dent in the buying habits of consumers .
`` The economy is so strong , it 's kind of hard to imagine consumers scaling back substantially because gasoline prices are up a dime , '' said Dan Seto , an economist with Nikko Securities International Co .
OPEC , as had been widely anticipated , voted to cut daily production by 2.1 million barrels .
If the decision sticks -- and that 's always an open question -- it would decrease the supply of oil on world markets by about 2.6 percent , Previous OPEC promises to cut production have often been undermined by many of its 11 member states that have pumped more oil than their individual quotas allowed .
However , evidence suggested that this time the oil cartel may show greater discipline .
Oil producing nations have been struggling with budget deficits , depleted coffers and other forms of economic pain inflicted by the lowest oil prices in more than a decade .
Desperate to boost revenues , they seem motivated by an exceptional desire to close ranks and honor their curtailed production levels in the hope of nudging prices higher .
`` Over the past few months , there has been considerable talk about the inability of oil producers , especially the members of OPEC , to respond appropriately to the dire situation facing us , '' OPEC President Youcef Yousfi of Algeria acknowledged in a speech to fellow ministers Tuesday .
`` A spirit of cohesion , solidarity and responsibility has prevailed amongst us , and oil exporters ... have reached a decision which , I believe , goes beyond expectations . ''
Under the agreement , OPEC will reduce its own oil output by 1.716 million barrels a day .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Non - OPEC producers like Mexico , Norway , Russia and Oman will reduce production by an additional 388,000 barrels a day</ENAMEX> .
The agreement was unanimous , and there were no last minute obstacles to the deal , Yousfi said .
OPEC members made the deal official after an exceptionally short , 20-minute meeting at a Vienna hotel .
In fact , the heavy lifting necessary to reach the agreement took place well before Tuesday .
Saudi Arabia and Iran , OPEC 's two largest producers , held separate talks to resolve one of the main stumbling blocks -- their year-long dispute over the base line from which Iran was to make production cuts .
In a major concession , Saudi Arabia accepted that Iran would reduce output from a base line of 3.9 million barrels a day instead of 3.6 million barrels .
The recently elected government of Venezuela , OPEC 's No. 3 producer , overcame domestic resistance and persuaded politically powerful trade unions to accept new cuts in production .
And two weeks ago , representatives of Saudi Arabia , Iran , Venezuela , Algeria and non-member Mexico agreed at a meeting in The Hague , Netherlands , to reduce output .
Once these hurdles were removed , Tuesday 's agreement was a matter of rubber-stamping the deal .
Anticipation of the OPEC cuts prompted crude prices to rise about $ 3 in the past several weeks , bouncing off 12-year lows caused by a world glut of oil and slack demand in recession-wracked countries of Asia .
Gasoline prices in the United States rose a sharp 8 1/2 cents in the past two weeks , following the crude increases .
Some analysts have predicted the OPEC cuts will cause U.S. gas prices to rise an additional 10 cents .
Price increases are `` extremely likely '' as a result of OPEC 's agreement , said Fergus McLeod , an oil analyst at BT Alex .
Brown .
McLeod predicted that the price of Brent crude oil on London futures markets would rise from about $ 13 now to at least $ 16 by the end of the year .
`` That may turn out to be conservative , '' he said .
`` If they really stick to this for a year , they could end up forcing up the market more than they intend . ''
Prices dropped on world oil markets Tuesday as traders took profits following the recent runup .
Some analysts noted that OPEC ca n't raise prices too much or it may prompt other countries with higher costs of production to find it profitable enough to resume pumping their own oil .
In the United States , automakers , airlines , truckers , plastics companies and other businesses that have benefited from the long slump in oil prices are cautiously preparing for higher costs .
`` It 's like the stock market -- you never know .
I do n't know if you can count on the OPEC guys to ever stick to their word , '' said Rick Todd , president of the 900-member South Carolina Trucking Association .
`` Most folks are expecting prices to rise , but to what extent is just guesswork . ''
Compliance with the cuts remains big question with some analysts .
Ishii Yoshiro , an analyst with Japan National Oil Corp. , said he doubted that compliance would be better than 80 percent .
`` One hundred percent compliance is physically very difficult , '' he said .
