LONDON
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
OPEC is staring at the weakest oil market since the disaster year of 1986 , and traders are betting the producers ca n't find a quick fix , if they find one at all .
OPEC 's average price plunged to dlrs 10.11 per barrel early this week -- a 12-year low and less than half the official OPEC target of dlrs 21 that analysts now call a joke .
Some of the biggest players in OPEC , including Saudi Arabia and Venezuela , are promising a new round of production cutbacks -- after an earlier emergency deal failed to rescue the market .
Kuwait , the United Emirates and non- OPEC member Oman pledged more cuts Tuesday night .
The Kuwaiti oil minister , Sheik Saud Nasser al- Sabah , said in Riyadh , Saudi Arabia , that he hopes petroleum exporters can come up with another 1.2 million barrels in production cuts by next week , when OPEC holds its summer meeting .
But analysts are n't sure whether OPEC and its non- OPEC allies in Mexico and Oman can slash production by even 1 million barrels a day .
And even if OPEC delivers , the glutted market might not recover for months .
The cheap oil is a bargain for consumers , including gasoline-guzzling U.S. motorists , but it 's devastating for the oil producers who planned their national budgets based on much higher oil revenues .
`` It 's pretty disastrous and there 's not really anything they can do to alleviate the troubles very quickly , '' said Leo Drollas , chief economist at the Center for Global Energy Studies in London .
`` They might as well write off ` 98 . ''
Ten of the 11 members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries pledged this spring to cut production by 1.245 million barrels a day .
They have delivered most but not all of those cuts , but Iraq complicated the formula by raising production under a U.N. oil-for-food deal , leaving OPEC short of its target .
News that the United Nations might be closer to ending its embargo of Iraqi crude exports , imposed after Iraq invaded fellow OPEC member Kuwait in 1990 , prompted oil traders to push prices even lower .
If Iraq gets back in this year , the timing could hardly be worse for the rest of OPEC and non- OPEC producers , also including Norway , who have tried to rescue the market .
`` Never dismiss Iraq , '' warned Mehdi Varzi , oil analyst at Dresdner Kleinwort Benson in London .
Oil rallied Tuesday on the futures markets , but in New York the benchmark light sweet crude contract for July wound up 42 cents higher at only dlrs 11.98 per barrel -- a depressing number for anybody in an industry that was enjoying premium oil prices of more than dlrs 20 per barrel late last year .
Even if OPEC were to announce another 1 million barrels of daily production cuts -- the target many analysts are looking for -- it could take months of adherence to those numbers to reduce the supply glut .
And OPEC 's members have long lacked the willpower to stick to their production agreements .
OPEC got itself into this jam by agreeing last winter to increase production , just before the economic crisis in Asia severely weakened global oil demand .
Although OPEC 's stated production ceiling is 27.5 million barrels a day , too high for current demand , outside experts say output hovers above 28 million barrels .
Analysts are n't predicting a repeat of the 1986 carnage , but they say the industry is changing dramatically .
As Big Oil adapted over the past decade to an era of cheaper prices , cutting production costs and many thousands of jobs , OPEC members have become ever more dependent on high oil revenues , according to Peter Bogin , an analyst at Cambridge Energy Research Associates in Paris .
The huge oversupply , which could persist for months or years , might force OPEC members to find ways to become less dependent on a market they no longer can control , he said .
`` They have to say , ` What 's our role as a cartel , if we are a cartel , or can we accept dlrs 6 or dlrs 8 oil ? ' ''
Bogin said .
OPEC formally opens its meeting on June 24 in Vienna , Austria .
OPEC members are Algeria , Iran , Iraq , Indonesia , Kuwait , Libya , Nigeria , Qatar , Saudi Arabia , the United Arab Emirates and Venezuela .
