LONDON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Robust growth in the U.S. economy and a continued recovery in Asia should cause demand for oil to outstrip available supplies through the winter , so long as OPEC members resist the temptation to exceed current production levels , according to a respected industry survey .
But the monthly report released Friday by the International Energy Agency raised uncertainties about the direction of prices , which have been rebounding from 12-year lows last winter .
The price of Brent crude oil from the North Sea has more than doubled since February , while the price of U.S. gasoline has soared 31 percent since February , when the national average dropped just below $ 1 a gallon .
A U.S. government report Friday on inflation at the wholesale level said energy costs surged 3.7 percent in August , the biggest one-month gain since a 5.5 percent rise in April .
In the past , higher prices have tempted some OPEC members to cheat on their quotas by pumping more oil in an effort to maximize short-term profits .
Such cheating could lead to a glut of oil that would in turn cause prices to fall .
The IEA survey assumed that the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries , which produces almost two-fifths of the world 's oil , would stick to its current levels of production for the rest of the year .
The Paris -based IEA is part of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development , a group of the world 's most developed nations .
Its report suggested that some of the recent increase in prices might not be justified .
It noted that the world 's wealthiest countries barely reduced their oil supplies in July , when they tapped inventories by what the IEA called a `` meager '' 70,000 barrels a day .
This means that an expected decline in oil supplies in the third-quarter is off to `` a very slow start , '' the report said .
But as temperatures start to cool , a seasonal increase in demand for heating oil should help keep prices high .
West Texas Intermediate crude , the benchmark oil in the United States , rose 5 percent last month and climbed to $ 23.55 a barrel Friday in New York , more than twice the Dec. 11 , 1998 low of $ 10.65 and the highest close on the New York Mercantile Exchange since February 1997 .
The upward spike in energy prices has contributed to heightened worries about inflation at the Federal Reserve , which has twice raised U.S. interest rates this summer .
Global demand for oil is expected to increase by 2.43 million barrels per day in the last quarter of the year , while supplies are forecast to rise by just 1 million barrels during the same period , the survey said .
World oil production averaged 73.15 million barrels per day last month , a drop of 200,000 barrels per day from July .
The report said the main causes for this decrease were a daily production cut of 150,000 barrels by OPEC 's biggest producer , Saudi Arabia , and fewer exports by suppliers in the former Soviet Union .
Temporary closures of oil rigs in Norway due to maintenance work also had an effect .
By far the biggest variable in the agency 's outlook is OPEC , which so far has shown an unusual degree of discipline in sticking to output cuts adopted by its members in March .
The IEA estimated that the cartel 's compliance rate with those cuts continued to be high in August , at 92 percent .
OPEC 's compliance rate in July was revised downwards from 91 percent to 89 percent .
However , some industry analysts cast doubt on the IEA 's assessment .
`` On the whole , I would say the OPEC numbers are too conservative , '' said Mehdi Varzi of the investment bank Dresdner Kleinwort Benson .
Varzi said OPEC 's actual compliance rate is no better than 85 percent , a view that suggests some members might be slipping back into a habit of cheating on their quotas .
Mark Redway , of the brokerage Greig Middleton and Co .
Ltd. , said OPEC 's compliance rate could actually be in `` the high 80s . ''
Nigeria , historically one of OPEC 's less-disciplined members , saw its monthly output fall in August for the third month in a row .
The IEA attributed this decline to disruptions caused by civil strife in southern Nigeria , where most of the country 's oil is produced .
On the other hand , Iran -- OPEC 's No. 2 producer -- boosted its output last month by an estimated 110,000 barrels per day .
Kuwait , Qatar and Algeria increased their production by smaller amounts , the report said .
OPEC members will meet Sept. 22 in Vienna , Austria , to decide whether to change their levels of production .
