VIENNA , Austria
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- OPEC ministers eager to end a global oil glut expressed hope Sunday that oil-exporting nations would abide by production cuts of more than 2 million barrels a day .
The new quotas , which are to begin April 1 , would remain in effect for a full year , Venezuelan Oil Minister Ali Rodriguez said ahead of Tuesday 's meeting of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries .
The meeting is expected to result in formal approval of production cuts agreed upon earlier this month .
`` We are here ... to save the situation of the collapsing prices of oil .
That is our main objective , '' Iraq 's Oil Minister Amer Mohammed Rasheed said after arriving at a Vienna hotel .
Excess supply and a weak demand for winter heating oil sent prices plunging to 12-year lows late last year .
Although consumers have benefitted from cheaper oil and gasoline , the soft market has inflicted economic pain on producers , including Britain , Norway and the oil-patch American states of Texas and Louisiana .
Prices finally began climbing two weeks ago , when representatives of OPEC 's three biggest members -- Saudi Arabia , Iran and Venezuela -- along with Algeria and nonmember Mexico agreed at a meeting in the Netherlands to reduce output .
On the New York Mercantile Exchange , crude oil for April delivery rose 24 cents to $ 15.46 a barrel on Friday .
Under the deal , Saudi Arabia will take the biggest cut -- 585,000 barrels from its current production of more than 8 million barrels a day .
No. 2 producer Iran will pump 264,000 fewer barrels a day , while Rodriguez confirmed that Venezuela will trim daily output by 125,000 barrels .
Saudi Arabian Oil Minister Ali Naimi said Sunday he expected full compliance with the new , lower levels of production .
OPEC estimates the current output of its 11 members at 27.66 million barrels a day .
At this level , supply exceeds demand by about 500,000 barrels , according to the Paris -based International Energy Agency .
The success of OPEC 's effort to buoy prices by pumping less oil depends upon the compliance of each member , Rodriguez said .
Cheating has been a chronic problem for the group .
Libya , one of the last OPEC members to confirm the size of its planned production cut , will pump 96,000 fewer barrels a day beginning April 1 , said Libyan Oil Minister Abdalla Salem El - Badri .
`` I hope that everybody will abide by the agreement , '' El - Badri said .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Non - OPEC members pledging to reduce production include Mexico , Russia , Oman and Norway</ENAMEX> .
