VIENNA , Austria
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Gasoline prices are likely to continue rising if OPEC fulfills expectations and approves production cuts of 2.1 million barrels a day when its representatives meet today .
Oil prices already reflect the impact of the expected cuts , and industry analysts say refiners of gasoline have wasted no time passing on the steeper prices to consumers .
`` There 's no question that gas prices in North America and the rest of the world have risen because of OPEC 's decision , '' said Doug Terreson of Morgan Stanley , speaking from his office in Houston .
The plan by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries would reduce the world 's oil supply by about 2.6 percent , in a unified effort with non- OPEC producers to strengthen prices for crude that had languished at a 12-year low as recently as December .
OPEC oil ministers have said the organization plans to reduce daily output by its members to 1.72 million barrels .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Non - OPEC producers like Mexico , Norway , Russia and Oman are expected to account for additional cuts totaling 388,000 barrels a day</ENAMEX> .
The agreement to curtail production was reached two weeks ago by the group 's three biggest members -- Saudi Arabia , Iran and Venezuela -- together with Mexico and fellow OPEC member Algeria .
Crude prices responded by jumping almost $ 3 a barrel , and gasoline prices followed suit .
`` After it became evident that OPEC was going to cut production , the price at the pump really began to move quickly , '' said George Gaspar of Robert W. Baird and Co. , a financial services firm based in Milwaukee , Wis .
The average price of all grades of gasoline at U.S. service stations surged nearly 8 1/2 cents per gallon over the past two weeks , according to the Lundberg Survey , the steepest and fastest increase since Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990 .
Prices shot up more than 9 percent at self-service pumps in the United States , where unleaded regular averaged nearly $ 1.03 in the latest survey , compared with just over 94 cents two weeks ago , according to the California -based Lundberg .
Analysts say OPEC 's plan to curtail production accounted for at least half of the rise in gasoline prices .
Another reason for more expensive gasoline has been the approach of spring , when people usually begin spending more time in their cars .
Gasoline inventories had been unusually large last fall and winter , said Fergus McLeod of the securities firm BT Alex .
Brown .
As inventories began to dwindle , gas prices began to rise from their depressed levels .
A decision by OPEC to pump less oil will likely cause gasoline prices to rise further -- by two to three cents a gallon for every additional dollar increase in the price for a barrel of oil , McLeod said .
`` If OPEC gets reasonably good compliance with the production cuts , that will lead to even higher gas prices in coming months , '' Terreson said .
In recent days , contracts for April delivery of light , sweet crude have traded in the $ 15-$ 15.50 range on the New York Mercantile Exchange .
Crude traded as low as $ 10.72 a barrel on that exchange in December .
Gaspar foresees prices rising by as much as 10 cents a gallon from their current levels .
The effect of cuts in oil output could continue to buoy gasoline prices well into the fall , he said , when gasoline prices typically decrease slightly as colder weather makes driving less attractive .
A possible glitch in the seemingly irresistible momentum toward OPEC production cuts has come in the form of a protest by Iraq .
Amer Mohammed Rasheed , Iraq 's oil minister , said in a report published Monday that Iraq would insist that Saudi Arabia , OPEC 's largest producer , make additional cuts on its own .
Iraq wants Saudi Arabia to reduce its output closer to the level it produced at prior to the Gulf War .
The Saudis began pumping more oil after the war to make up for the market share Iraq lost when U.N. sanctions barred exports of Iraqi oil .
Saudi Arabia , which now produces more than 8 million barrels a day , has pledged to reduce output by 585,000 barrels a day -- more than any other OPEC member .
But Rasheed would insist that Saudi Arabia cut back by an additional 1.1 million barrels or more , he told the Middle East Economic Survey , a weekly oil review published in Nicosia , Cyprus .
Other OPEC oil ministers seemed to play down the potential for trouble at Tuesday 's meeting .
`` Agreement tomorrow is confirmed , '' said Venezuelan Oil Minister Ali Rodriguez .
