VIENNA , Austria
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
OPEC plans oil production cutbacks , hoping to undo the damage it did to prices by an ill-judged decision to start pumping more crude last winter .
World oil supplies are now so glutted that OPEC acknowledged Thursday its plan to withdraw some 1.355 million barrels a day from the market is not likely to have an immediate impact .
But the initial reaction on oil futures markets was negative , with modest early losses on the London market worsening after New York traders went to work .
Brent crude oil to be delivered in August was off by 41 cents at dlrs 13.20 per barrel by late this afternoon on London 's International Petroleum Exchange .
Light sweet crude oil for August was down 58 cents at dlrs 14.02 at midday on the New York Mercantile Exchange .
Traders were skeptical about whether OPEC will deliver its latest promises , and it likely will be about six weeks before they get initial indications about whether all the promised production cuts are real .
Nigerian oil minister Dan Etete suggested that it might take until October or November for prices to improve by around dlrs 3 per barrel .
But experts say that if OPEC sticks to its promises -- and this is far from certain given the group 's previous lack of willpower -- then prices could move sharply higher by early next year , shifting the fortunes of global economies .
The OPEC president , United Arab Emirates oil minister Obaid bin Saif al- Nasseri , vowed that the new cuts will `` banish the volatility so plaguing the market . ''
Algerian oil minister Youcef Yousfi said Thursday that if the lower production fails to improve the market , then the exporters might agree to curtail production more sharply .
`` If it is necessary to cut further , OPEC will meet and take a decision , '' Yousfi said .
Firm prices would be a welcome relief to oil producers who recently saw oil plunge to levels unseen since the industry 's disaster year of 1986 .
OPEC 's average price was less than dlrs 11 per barrel last week , barely half the group 's official target of dlrs 21 .
If OPEC 's plans succeed , then consumers and oil-dependent economies like Japan and Germany would stop getting such a huge break on their fuel bills .
Leo Drollas , chief economist at the London -based Center for Global Energy Studies , said OPEC 's new deal appears to have a `` slow-burn fuse '' but that the promised production cuts are severe enough to make supplies extremely tight in the longer term .
OPEC said its new production figures will stay in effect for one year , starting July 1 .
`` The duration , that 's the key , '' Drollas said .
`` That 's the sting in the tail .
This , on paper , looks hideous for next year .
You 're talking dlrs 25 oil . ''
Not so fast , though .
OPEC was forced into action after its disastrous decision in November to raise stated output by 10 percent .
The extra oil started flooding the market just as the southeast Asian economic crisis began cutting into demand for crude oil , the world 's most vital commodity .
OPEC 's new round of cuts -- following an earlier batch in March that failed to improve depressed markets -- would put the group 's total output at around 26.5 million barrels a day , said the OPEC secretary-general , Rilwanu Lukman of Nigeria .
That would be around a half million barrels less than OPEC was pumping before its most influential player , Saudi oil minister Ali Naimi , pushed through last year 's plan for higher production .
A wild card remains Iraq -- which is not participating in the effort to produce less oil because its output is still held back by U.N. sanctions imposed during the Gulf War .
The latest OPEC deal , and the earlier production cutbacks , highlight a new partnership that conceivably could change the face of global petroleum politics .
OPEC 's top producer , Saudi Arabia , teamed up with Venezuela , which has long been the biggest violator of OPEC 's quota system , and non- OPEC member Mexico to form the foundation of the cutback arrangement .
In both sets of supply cuts , these unlikely partners agreed to reduce oil output on the basis that any Saudi cuts would be matched by the combined total from Venezuela and Mexico .
Members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries are Algeria , Indonesia , Iran , Iraq , Kuwait , Libya , Nigeria , Qatar , Saudi Arabia , the United Arab Emirates and Venezuela .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Non - OPEC producers Russia , Oman , Egypt and Norway also participated in one or both rounds of production cuts</ENAMEX> .
