VIENNA , Austria
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- OPEC members agreed today on a plan to cut crude oil production by 2.104 million barrels a day and to maintain the lower levels of output for a full year beginning April 1 .
The group of 11 oil producing nations detailed the plan in a communique released after a meeting of OPEC members .
It includes reductions by non- OPEC producers as well as those in the group in an effort to end a global oil glut and strengthen prices that had languished at a 12-year low as recently as December .
If the participating nations fully comply with the agreement , the supply of oil on world markets would be reduced by about 2.6 percent .
The agreement was unanimous , said Youcef Yousfi of Algeria , president of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries .
`` The compliance , I am sure , will be 100 percent .
And there is a full determination of all countries to commit to this agreement '' Yousfi said , before OPEC ministers began a formal meeting at the OPEC Secretariat .
He said there were no last minute obstacles to the deal .
Under the agreement , OPEC nations will reduce oil output by 1.716 million barrels a day , Algerian officials said .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Non - OPEC producers like Mexico , Norway , Russia and Oman will reduce production by an additional 388,000 barrels a day</ENAMEX> .
Saudi Arabia , OPEC 's largest producer , will slash output by 585,000 barrels of crude a day .
OPEC 's No. 2 producer Iran will curtail daily output by 264,000 barrels , while Venezuela will pump 125,000 fewer barrels of oil a day .
OPEC will evaluate its output levels at the group 's next meeting in September and reserves the right to adjust production levels before the full 12-month period ends , al- Sabah said .
`` It all depends on how the market reacts , '' he said , adding that Kuwait hoped to see prices rise to between $ 17 and $ 18 a barrel .
Saudi Oil Minister Ali Naimi said that the latest cuts will be sufficient to raise prices `` soon '' but declined to specify a time frame for higher prices .
Brent crude oil futures were trading at $ 13.69 a barrel by midafternoon on the International Petroleum Exchange in London , down 19 cents from Monday 's close .
Prices had risen sharply since the cuts were proposed two weeks ago .
Price increases are `` extremely likely '' as a result of the agreement , said Fergus McLeod , an oil analyst at BT Alex .
Brown .
Mcleod predicted that Brent prices would reach at least $ 16 by the end of the year .
`` That may turn out to be conservative , '' he said .
`` If they really stick to this for a year , they could end up forcing up the market more than they intend . ''
Ishii Yoshiro , an analyst with Japan National Oil Corp. , doubted that all members of OPEC would comply fully with the lower production levels .
Cheating by members has undermined OPEC 's efforts to stabilize prices in the past .
`` One hundred percent compliance is physically very difficult , '' Yoshiro said .
He predicted that the group probably would not achieve a compliance rate of much better than 80 percent .
A production decrease was proposed two weeks ago by Saudi Arabia , Iran , Venezuela and Algeria , together with non-member Mexico .
Crude prices responded by jumping almost $ 3 a barrel , and gasoline prices followed suit .
Experts say gasoline prices are likely to continue rising .
George Gaspar , an analyst with Robert W. Baird and Co. , a financial services firm based in Milwaukee , expects increases of as much as 10 cents a gallon and said the cuts could continue to buoy gasoline prices into the fall when prices typically decrease slightly as colder weather makes driving less attractive .
Iraq was n't included in the production cuts because its sales are controlled by the United Nations under an oil-for-food deal .
The average price of all grades of gasoline at U.S. service stations surged nearly 8 1/2 cents over the past two weeks , according to the Lundberg Survey , the steepest and fastest increase since Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990 .
Analysts say OPEC 's plan to curtail production accounted for at least half of the rise in gasoline prices , which last reached this level two years ago .
Another reason for more expensive gasoline has been the approach of spring , when people usually begin spending more time in their cars , and dwindling gasoline inventories .
