MADRID , Spain
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Mexico , Venezuela and Saudi Arabia discussed cutting oil production by a further two million barrels a day but failed to reach agreement , Mexico 's oil minister said Friday .
The minister , Luis Tellez , also said that Iran 's production of 300,000 additional barrels a day was creating problems for the market .
`` There 's certainly a problem with the Iranians , '' he said in an interview Friday , a day after he concluded six hours of talks with oil and energy colleagues from Saudi Arabia and Venezuela .
Tellez said the tripartite meeting of major oil producers discussed the concept of cutting a further two million barrels a day `` but there was no agreement to do this now . ''
Under the proposal , OPEC members would bear the burden of cutting output by 1.5 million barrels per day and non- OPEC members would account for the remaining 500,000 barrels a day .
Tellez said Mexico would be willing to cut production further given a firm commitment to cut from members of the 11-nation Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries , and also given the right market conditions to do so .
So far , Saudi Arabia , Mexico and Venezuela have led an initiative for cuts by producers that totaled 3.1 million barrels per day .
Analysts and some OPEC members say an additional 1.5 million barrels a day in reductions is needed to have an impact on prices .
In the meeting Thursday , the delegates of Saudi Arabia , Mexico and Venezuela agreed to maintain reduced output through 1999 .
The meeting followed similar gatherings by oil ministers from other countries to find a way to boost prices , which hit 12-year lows and stripped oil-dependent nations billions of dollars in revenues .
Under Thursday 's agreement , Saudi Arabia will maintain a cut of 725,000 barrels a day , Venezuela will produce 525,000 barrels less and Mexico will produce 200,000 fewer barrels .
It was an extension to commitments to reductions reached in June .
No new cuts were decided .
Instead , a joint statement said the three nations will initiate efforts to bring other countries to join in reducing output in the future .
A Saudi source said he was optimistic that efforts to alleviate the pressure of high supplies on the market could succeed .
`` We are hopeful that this motion and spirit will not be impeded for the sake of our individual and collective interests , '' he said , speaking on condition of anonymity .
Prices have hit 12-year lows this year , stripping oil-dependent nations billions of dollars in revenues .
Crude prices had risen Wednesday over the possibility of airstrikes against Iraq .
News from the oil ministers meeting Thursday , plus the growing belief that oil production from Iraq wo n't be disrupted , sent prices plunging dlrs 1.35 to dlrs 11.03 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange .
London Brent fell dlrs 1.27 a barrel to dlrs 10.09 .
Mexico 's Tellez said Friday that Iranian compliance and the baseline of production that the country was using to cut from remained an issue .
Iran , OPEC 's No. 2 producer after Saudi Arabia , said publicly and privately that its baseline was 3.6 million barrels a day but Tehran is using a baseline of 3.9 million barrels a day , Tellez said .
Tellez said he had been told by Iran 's oil minister , Bijan Namdar Zanganeh , that Tehran was using the 3.9 million barrels per day baseline .
`` It 's a major issue because that 's an extra 300,000 barrels a day , '' Tellez said .
He said that Saudi Oil Minister Ali Naimi was planning to visit Iran in the near future to try and convince the country to adhere to the 3.6 million barrels per day baseline that Iran agreed to in March .
Tellez said compliance is voluntary .
`` If Iran does n't want to comply , there 's no way to force it , '' he added .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">After Madrid , Naimi headed to Norway as part of the initiative to urge other producers to cut output until the end of the year .
Norway has already cut its production by 100,000 barrels a day</ENAMEX> .
-LRB- sg/dw -RRB-
