PARIS
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- U.S. Energy Secretary Bill Richardson , who is in the midst of talks with OPEC nations , on Wednesday said he was confident that the oil cartel will act to cut soaring prices next week .
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries meets Monday in Vienna , Austria , and Richardson now believes that most of its 11 members support increasing supplies .
`` One month ago , most said that an increase in oil supply was not needed , '' Richardson told reporters in Paris .
`` Today , most say that there is a need to increase output . ''
He declined to specify how much additional supply he was pressing for , but noted that there is an estimated 2 million barrel-a-day shortfall , with global consumption running at 75 million barrels a day and production at 73 million barrels .
Oil exporters inside and outside of OPEC cut production in 1998 and 1999 to boost prices that fell to a 12-year low .
As a result , the price for a barrel of crude went from $ 10.72 a barrel on Dec. 10 , 1998 , to a 9-year high of more than $ 34 earlier this month .
It has since settled at about $ 28 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange .
Many Americans are finding it difficult to cover sharply higher heating oil and gasoline prices .
Western governments , fearful that higher oil prices will cause inflation and slow economic growth , have urged OPEC to raise output to bring prices down .
Richardson is holding a grueling schedule of meetings with oil-producing nations .
He has met with representatives from all OPEC countries , apart from Iraq , Iran and Libya , with whom the United States has no diplomatic ties .
He also has seen officials in non- OPEC oil-producing countries Mexico and Norway .
On Tuesday , the energy secretary pleaded his case to Nigerian President Olusegun Obasanjo .
On Wednesday , he met with Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika .
Both Nigeria and Algeria are OPEC members .
Richardson , who spoke with reporters after meeting the 25 country ambassadors of the International Energy Agency , was to travel to Norway on Thursday .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Norway , which is not an OPEC member , has cooperated with the cartel in reducing production to raise prices</ENAMEX> .
Richardson insisted that his lobbying has been productive .
`` American diplomatic efforts have made a difference , '' he said .
`` There is agreement that prices are too high and that there needs to be an equilibrium . ''
Richardson added that in OPEC countries , `` there is a recognition that current prices could threaten world economic growth . ''
If OPEC does n't cut prices , Richardson said that the U.S. government would `` reserve '' the option of tapping its emergency oil supplies .
