LONDON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- OPEC oil ministers are widely expected to reach an agreement next week that would boost petroleum supplies to thirsty importers .
But the crucial , unanswered question remains whether OPEC countries will pump crude in sufficient quantities to ease oil prices down from the highest levels since the 1991 Persian Gulf War .
The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries has been under intense pressure from the United States to relax year -old production quotas that have caused prices for crude and refined products such as gasoline to skyrocket .
American motorists now pay an average of $ 1.54 per gallon for unleaded gasoline , an increase of 57.3 cents since last March , according to a recent survey conducted for the AAA auto club .
Industry analysts are warning of possible shortages and $ 2-a-gallon gasduring the peak driving season this summer .
Oil ministers for the 11 OPEC countries are to meet Monday in Vienna , Austria , for their semiannual review of global oil markets .
Saudi Arabia , OPEC 's No. 1 exporter , has expressed interest in stabilizing prices at a level that wo n't cause extreme economic pain for the countries that buy its oil .
If high oil prices start bringing down economies , producers fear , demand for oil will plunge , and OPEC revenue from crude oil sales could quickly shrink .
Other members of the cartel have echoed the call for price stability .
Even Iran , long a hawkish supporter of high prices , now appears to back some form of a production increase .
But OPEC has not shown willingness to boost production by the 2 million-2.5 million barrels per day that the United States and other industrial powers are hoping for .
Instead , analysts predict that OPEC will raise its daily output by little more than 1 million barrels .
Many say this wo n't be enough to simultaneously replenish depleted oil inventories , meet seasonal needs for gasoline and push down prices .
`` I think it 's unlikely that OPEC will simply agree to what the West is asking for , '' warns Charlie Sharp of the London brokerage T. Hoare Canaccord .
OPEC produces more than 26 million barrels of crude each day , or about 35 percent of the world 's supply .
Non - OPEC producers that have cut output in tandem with the cartel , including Mexico and Norway , favor an increase in production but are waiting to see what OPEC does .
To some extent , OPEC is a victim of it own success in reviving prices from the doldrums of late 1998 , when crude sagged to less than $ 11 per barrel .
After prices failed to respond to two rounds of production cuts earlier that year , OPEC finally got results in March 1999 when it trimmed output by an additional 2.1 million barrels per day , reducing the global supply by 2.6 percent .
Crude prices more than tripled as a result , peaking in the United States on March 8 at $ 34.37 per barrel .
Prices for home heating oil and gasoline have soared , creating what Peter Gignoux , head of the petroleum desk for Salomon Smith Barney , calls `` an oil-shock quarter '' for the first three months of the year .
U.S. Energy Secretary Bill Richardson has been meeting with officials of oil-producing nations to stress America 's displeasure with costlier crude .
Richardson said Wednesday that if OPEC does n't act to bring down prices , the United States would reserve the option of dipping into its own strategic petroleum stockpile .
OPEC Secretary - General Rilwanu Lukman said Wednesday that it is unfair to assume that the Vienna meeting will result in increased output .
However , other OPEC sources and industry analysts believe that a decision to boost production is likely .
`` I think there is a consensus over major issues , '' says Raad Alkadiri of the Petroleum Finance Co. , a consulting firm based in Washington .
One complication is that OPEC members already are cheating on their own quotas , overproducing by at least 1 million barrels per day .
OPEC 's compliance rate with its cuts of last March has slipped from a high of 91 percent in July to 74 percent in February , according to the Paris -based International Energy Agency .
Any increase in production must somehow account for these `` unofficial '' barrels , which have benefitted consumers by helping to moderate the spike in prices .
Sharp of T. Hoare Canaccord suggests that OPEC might decide to let its compliance rate slip to perhaps 60 percent , in addition to increasing its official production .
`` That effectively would create a softish landing in the oil price , '' he says .
Anticipation that OPEC will open its taps further has caused prices to slip over the past several days .
West Texas Intermediate crude , the benchmark U.S. oil , has tumbled almost 20 percent since peaking two weeks ago .
But it was up 57 cents at $ 27.88 a barrel this morning on the New York Mercantile Exchange .
