Latin American oil ministers are suggesting that OPEC raise its output of crude oil in order to restrain soaring prices that are at 9-year highs and have substantially boosted gasoline and heating oil costs in the United States .
Mexico 's energy minister , Luis Tellez , said Thursday that he believes Saudi Arabia , the largest OPEC producer , and Norway , a major producer outside the cartel , both share Mexico 's view that production should be increased .
His comments in a radio interview in Mexico City were the latest suggesting that pressure is building on the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to raise production quotas at its meeting March 27 in Vienna , Austria .
Late Wednesday , Venezuela 's oil minister , Ali Rodriguez , called on OPEC to do something about rising crude prices .
`` I think it 's time to take corrective measures , '' Rodriguez said in a televised address .
Meanwhile , Saudi Oil Minister Ali Naimi , who is on a visit to South Korean , was quoted as saying he favored crude oil prices in a range of $ 20 to $ 25 a barrel .
Currently crude is above $ 30 in the United States and is approaching that level in Europe .
A statement issued Thursday by the Korean Energy Ministry also said Naimi suggested that crude prices would fall following the high-demand winter season .
It gave no clue , however , whether Naimi favors raising quotas at the next OPEC meeting or believes prices will moderate on their own .
Saudi Arabia , the world 's largest crude oil exporter , and Venezuela are among the top producing members of OPEC .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Mexico and Norway are not members of the 11-nation cartel , but both supported production cutbacks begun in 1998 to increase oil prices from severely depressed levels .
Oil prices have more than doubled since OPEC and its non- OPEC allies agreed in March 1999 to cut output by some 2.1 million barrels a day</ENAMEX> .
That , added to the 1998 cuts , removed more than 4.3 million barrels a day from international markets , a decline of about 6 percent .
A series of upcoming meetings could provide clues on what OPEC may do at the end of March .
U.S. Energy Secretary Bill Richardson is scheduled to travel to Mexico on Saturday for talks with Tellez on oil prices .
Next week he is expected to travel to Saudi Arabia and Kuwait for further talks .
Oil ministers from the Arab Gulf states are due to meet next Wednesday in the Saudi capital Riyadh to coordinate their strategy for the OPEC meeting .
Tellez , meanwhile , has scheduled a trip to Norway on March 1 for talks with his Norwegian counterpart , Marit Arnstad .
A day later , he is scheduled to meet with the Saudi and Venezuelan oil ministers .
Mexico , Saudi Arabia and Venezuela were the trio of oil producers that put together the 1998 output cuts that involved both OPEC and non- OPEC producers .
