The price of crude oil has doubled since early last year .
Higher prices for gasoline , heating oil and other products are hitting every consumer 's pocketbook .
Is OPEC flexing its muscles again ?
Not exactly .
There 's a new oil cartel in town , and after a shaky start two years ago , its members have achieved -- for now , at least -- the unity necessary to hold to their production quotas .
And that means higher prices .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">In a sense , this cartel is simply the 11 members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries plus two -- Mexico and Norway</ENAMEX> .
But the world 's oil-producing and exporting nations are wielding power this time around mainly because of a shove not from the Middle East but rather from Mexico -- and especially from its persistent energy minister , Luis K. Tellez , a novice in the world of oil .
When Tellez began his mission , he was worried about the devastating impact that falling oil prices were having on the economy in Mexico , which in 1997 relied on oil for 38 percent of its revenues .
But his leadership has been felt the world over .
`` Without Tellez , this coalition would not have been possible , '' said Dr. Gary Ross , chief executive of PIRA Energy Group , a consulting firm based in Manhattan .
The coalition has shown such cohesion that some analysts predict that crude oil could rise to an extraordinary level -- $ 30 a barrel -- by the end of the year , a price not seen since January 1991 , during the Persian Gulf war .
Already , the price of crude oil has more than doubled , to $ 23.45 a barrel from $ 11 early this year .
Not that the coalition is home free .
Prices hit $ 24 a barrel last month , but slipped back when traders thought they saw hints of cracks in the cartel 's solidarity .
After all , if one country breaks ranks , the cartel 's tenuous grip on the world market could crumble .
For the moment , though , there seems little easing in the cartel 's united front or in rising oil prices .
For one thing , the bullish global economy strengthens the group 's grip .
World oil inventories have been declining , but in the past year demand has been rising sharply .
Most Western economies are in high gear , and as Asian economies have recovered from their turmoil last year , their need for oil has grown , too .
World demand , now about 76 million barrels a day , could outrun supply by about three million barrels a day as early as this quarter , said Frederick Leuffer , an oil analyst at Bear Stearns .
`` If the oil exporters stay with their cuts , inventories of oil will run down hard and push the price up to close to $ 30 , '' Leuffer said , echoing a view shared by many oil experts .
`` Everyone is on the edge of their seat about when the discipline will break or when the first increase will be made in the production quotas . ''
Everything was different in the early months of 1998 , when the coalition was forged .
With oil prices at $ 15 to $ 16 a barrel , oil producers were hurting .
Mexico was in particularly dire straits , forced to make a series of painful cuts in government spending that hit its people where it hurt most : in health , education and other basic services .
Tellez , an economist who had no previous experience in the oil industry , decided to try to steer the world 's oil-producing nations in a new direction .
When he became energy minister in 1997 , the soft-spoken Tellez knew neither his colleagues nor much about the arcane world of oil politics .
But he jumped headlong into the oil patch , and within a year he was able to persuade a few key oil ministers and officials from Saudi Arabia and Venezuela to form a new coalition of oil-producing nations .
`` It certainly demonstrates a new configuration , '' said Daniel Yergin , the chairman of Cambridge Energy Research Associates , a consulting group based in Cambridge , Mass .
`` Mexico 's role has become central , whereas before it was more peripheral . ''
Unknown in the industry just two years ago , Tellez has become a force .
`` Tellez is now a significant player in the world of oil , '' Yergin said .
How long he remains one depends upon Mexico itself , for he made no promises about Mexico 's participation in the group beyond the end of next year .
In some ways , Tellez seems an unlikely world-shaker .
A short , slight 41-year -old with receding dark hair , he was trained as an economist specializing in international finance , and his experience in government had been largely with a contentious project that gave tenant farmers title to the land they farmed .
In a recent interview in the lobby of the Four Seasons Hotel in Manhattan , where he spoke at a meeting of oil industry experts , Tellez reminisced about his plunge into the murky waters of oil diplomacy .
After getting his doctorate in economics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1986 , Tellez , who runs and plays tennis to remain trim , taught economics at his alma mater in Mexico for a time .
In 1987 , he joined the Finance Ministry , and two years later helped to put together a plan , led by Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady , that reduced Mexico 's foreign debt .
In 1990 , he moved to the Agriculture Ministry , and in 1994 was made chief of staff to President Ernesto Zedillo , whom he had known since his early days as an economist .
Then it was on to the Energy Ministry , where the last months of 1997 were particularly bleak , he recalled , with oil prices falling to $ 17 a barrel in December .
At one point , `` we sold a shipment of oil for $ 7 a barrel , '' he said .
`` Such a price has not been seen since the Great Depression . ''
As revenues plunged , Mexico had to cut its budget twice .
Oil producers seemed unable to change the disastrous policies that led to the price spiral .
But Tellez managed to break through this wall of paralysis , mainly with what he called `` gentlemen 's agreements '' among Saudi Arabia , Venezuela and Mexico .
In February 1998 , he began his effort to break the logjam by consulting with Zedillo , who gave him his full support .
He then contacted Erwin Arrieta , oil minister of Venezuela , a founding member of OPEC .
Arrieta agreed on the need for action , and the two men met in Miami , discussing , among other things , the possibility of Mexico forging a coalition with Norway , another major non- OPEC producer .
It was an unusual initiative , one that could be politically touchy back in Mexico , which as a big oil exporter -- particularly to the United States -- had long kept its distance from OPEC .
Any sign of change would raise concerns that Mexico was giving up its carefully guarded independence .
Still , with the support of Arrieta , and using various oil experts as intermediaries , he tried to find out whether Ali Naimi , the Saudi oil minister , would be willing to talk to him .
Word came back that he would .
The Saudis , who as the world 's largest exporters play a leading role in OPEC , had helped set off the latest crisis in oil prices by pushing through a higher production ceiling for OPEC late in 1997 .
Naimi 's support would thus be crucial in any attempt to halt the slide .
When Tellez called him at his office in Riyadh in February 1998 , he found that they had similar concerns .
Their countries ' budgets were being torn to shreds by falling oil revenue , and no one seemed to be taking any action to limit production .
`` It was simple , '' Tellez said .
`` It was important to do something . ''
Naimi invited him and Arrieta for secret talks -- the first time a Mexican oil minister had been granted such a meeting .
On the way , Tellez made a stop in Norway , also a big oil exporter , to see what position that country would take .
The Norwegian energy minister , Anne Enger Lahnstein , and other Norwegian officials listened to him , he said , but did not commit themselves .
Only later did Norway , which also had a tradition of not cooperating with OPEC , go along with production cuts .
With only one assistant in tow , Tellez flew to Riyadh , where he and Arrieta , who arrived with a full staff on a private jet , sat down with Naimi in a luxurious official guest house in March 1998 .
With oil prices still languishing around $ 14 a barrel , the three wasted little time , taking only one day to agree to cut the coalition 's production by 1.6 million to 2 million barrels a day .
Naimi had the formidable , and delicate , task of getting other major OPEC producers to agree .
Through an intense day of telephone calls , he lined up the often fractious group to support a cut of 1.6 million barrels a day .
Because their talks had been secret -- and because Mexico had never before cooperated with OPEC at such a level -- the announcement of the deal on March 22 came as a surprise to experts and analysts .
Despite skepticism that the new group would be able to stick together , oil prices began to recover quickly , from $ 14.65 a barrel in March to $ 17 a month later .
The recovery , though , was short-lived .
With most Asian economies going into a severe downturn and demand falling from big oil importers like Japan and South Korea , the glut of oil started to build again .
Especially remarkable in the story of this ad hoc group has been its members ' willingness to abide by the cuts through thick and thin -- even when prices kept falling last year because of the decline of the Asian economies .
Skeptics were even more stunned when the group agreed on an additional series of production cuts this year -- totaling about 5.3 million barrels a day -- after its initial cuts last year .
According to Yergin , the author of `` The Prize , '' a history of the oil industry -LRB- Simon & Schuster , 1991 -RRB- , it was the `` specter of $ 5-a-barrel oil '' -- a price so low that it would devastate the economies of many oil-exporting nations -- that inspired the group 's cohesion .
`` The source of the discipline is dire necessity and trauma that these countries went through because of the collapse in prices , '' he added .
And Ross , of PIRA , said : `` What these countries found is that they have a common interest .
The low oil prices were extremely painful to them since it cut their revenue . ''
Another reason , he said , has been the willingness of political leaders of the three nations that lead the coalition -- Saudi Arabia , Venezuela and Mexico -- to back up their top oil officials .
`` Everyone thought OPEC was declining and losing members , '' he added , particularly after 1997 , when the organization seemed to lack the will to break the disastrous pattern of pumping more oil , even as prices were plunging .
But now , again , a single coalition accounts for more than half of world oil production , a share that OPEC itself had not held since the 1970s .
And this cartel could be around for a while .
Many longtime observers of OPEC and the oil industry say that the new coalition will remain potent and that it could well be a stabilizing influence on world oil prices over the long term .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">One vital component of this stability is Tellez 's effort : by bringing Mexico and Norway together with OPEC , he has eliminated a big reason that past productions cuts have often been ineffective</ENAMEX> .
In the old days , Mexico and Norway often acted as a thorn in the side of OPEC .
When the cartel tried to cut production , they pumped all the oil they could .
Sure enough , OPEC members would follow suit to protect their markets , and OPEC 's resolve to keep prices stable would crumble .
This coalition also has a different look .
Even after two years , the group remains informal .
While OPEC has a large staff and an elaborate headquarters in Vienna , the new group has no name or offices .
It subsists largely on the growing trust among the sharply different personalities of the coalition 's energy officials .
They communicate mainly by telephone , e-mail and periodic meetings .
`` We 're getting to know each other , '' Tellez said .
`` Building up trust is very important . ''
And he saw no reason to change this informal approach .
Trust will be vital if the cartel is to last .
Tellez said that current prices were not too high and that he saw no reason for the group to increase production .
He said that there were no plans to discuss such a step at a meeting to be held on Nov. 17 in Riyadh with Saudi and Venezuelan officials .
Oil traders clearly thought differently .
When word of the meeting leaked out , crude oil , which had been trading in the $ 24 range , slid to $ 22 .
Leuffer said the market 's reaction might have strengthened the group 's resolve not to raise production , since it proved what could happen if it showed the least sign that it might do so .
The United States , of course , looks on from a different angle , because it imports 56 percent of its oil , making its economy vulnerable if prices soar .
For now , though , higher energy prices have not had a large-enough effect to fuel inflation , said Patrick Jackman , an economist at the Bureau of Labor Statistics , which puts together the Consumer Price Index .
Average prices for regular gasoline have risen from 95 cents a gallon last winter to about $ 1.29 , and heating oil this winter will cost about $ 1.04 a gallon , up from 80 cents last winter .
`` Nothing bad has happened yet , but it is something you have to keep your eye on , '' said William Dudley , the chief United States economist for Goldman , Sachs , adding that the core inflation rate was running at 2 percent so far the year .
Still , if the price of crude oil keeps rising , the impact on the American economy will be substantial , Jackman said , because oil is used in so many consumer products .
The full impact is yet to be felt in Mexico , either .
Higher crude oil prices have helped the government begin to recover from a huge drop in revenues in 1998 , when spending cuts caused widespread hardship .
Mexico 's oil revenues totaled $ 9.7 billion in 1997 , plunged to $ 6.4 billion in 1998 and are estimated to recover to $ 8.5 billion this year .
But Tellez -- who can claim a great deal of credit for that recovery -- is not being hailed as a hero .
That is because the money is going mainly to shore up the battered peso , not to restore services .
None of this has been easy for Tellez , who for most of his career was rarely in the limelight .
When oil prices were still falling in 1998 , even after Mexico and others had made cuts , he bore the brunt of increasing criticism in the press and among some oil experts in Mexico that his initiative had only added to the misery .
Mexico had cut its production but now , with plunging prices , it was getting even less revenue , the argument went .
Tellez recalled that at one point even his mentor , Zedillo , had second thoughts .
`` Every time you get together with your friends the price goes down , '' he recalled the president telling him once in jest .
`` So be careful . ''
