There was a wait and see attitude among some analysts and industry experts on whether all of the production cuts would materialize .
`` The devil is in the details , '' said Alan Struth , an economist for Phillips Petroleum , which is based in Bartelsville , Okla .
`` Who complies and who does n't will be the critical thing . ''
The coalition of major oil producers called early last year for cuts of 3.2 million barrels a day , of which OPEC 's portion was 2.6 million barrels .
For a time , this helped crude oil prices recover .
But as of February , according to a survey by Bloomberg , OPEC had achieved only about 79 percent of its promised reductions .
It was the drop in demand , particularly in Asia , that was the main reason last year 's price recovery was short-lived and prices fell again .
Now , there are reasons for hope that Asian economies and demand for oil are rebounding , especially in Thailand and South Korea -- and some optimists even mention Japan .
Last year the price of crude oil averaged $ 14.35 for West Texas Intermediate compared with $ 20.60 in 1997 .
The price for the first two months this year averaged about $ 12.25 until a recent recovery .
Wholesale gasoline futures rose to a five-month high Friday , as traders sought to lock in prices , expecting that the prices at the wholesale level and at the pump would increase moderately in the spring .
Although there could be attempts by refiners and station owners to put through price increases quickly , it has traditionally taken weeks for increases in futures prices to be passed through to the pump .
While at first crude oil surged on the news of the meeting , the run-up abated as the sketchiness of the agreement became evident .
West Texas Intermediate crude oil for April delivery first rose by as much as 80 cents , to $ 15.11 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange , before settling back at $ 14.49 a barrel , up 18 cents for the day .
What some analysts found to be significant was that the coalition of major producers has been able to come together again to lead the effort to make further cuts .
`` The basic agreement has survived , '' Ms. Hittle said .
`` That is quite remarkable compared to previous OPEC agreements . ''
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Norway , another non- OPEC member , is expected to take part in the newly proposed reductions , the oil ministers said in a statement issued at The Hague</ENAMEX> .
The statement also said that they have resolved a dispute over Iran 's promised cutbacks , a particularly contentious issue for Saudi Arabia .
Youcef Yousfi , the oil minister for Algeria who is also the president of OPEC , said that a more precise breakdown of the cuts would be given at the organization 's meeting on March 23 .
Even if the cuts were implemented on April 1 , it would take until May for the flow of oil to be reduced .
Nevertheless , the anticipation of a reduction in supply could lead to a recovery of crude oil prices before that .
John H. Lichtblau , the chairman of the Petroleum Industry Research Foundation , an oil industry group based in New York City , said that it was the huge losses in revenue suffered by the major oil producers that has spurred them on to seek further cuts .
He said that the OPEC countries , except for Iraq , had seen revenues from oil exports drop to $ 100 billion last year compared with $ 156 billion in 1997 .
`` It pays for them to cut back , '' he added , because the higher prices will bring more revenue than the loss of revenue from exporting less oil .
While the lower oil prices have led to low gasoline and heating oil prices , they have also caused major cutbacks in staff by major oil companies and smaller producers who have shut wells and cut back on exploration .
Tens of thousands of oil service workers in the Southwest have lost their jobs .
Even if oil prices recover , companies will be slow to add workers until they are sure that the higher prices will be long term .
Lichtblau also said that if reports were true that Saudi Arabia had agreed to cut back 600,000 barrels a day , it would mean a major shift in position .
In the past the Saudis have said they would not cut back below 8 million barrels a day .
