The lowest oil prices in 12 years have created a severe crisis for oil-producing countries both inside and outside of OPEC , and they have been struggling to reverse the decline .
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries has found itself increasingly impotent in the oil market , and as its 11 member nations prepare to meet in Vienna Wednesday , a new , loosely structured coalition has emerged , led by such big OPEC members as Saudi Arabia and Venezuela , as well as non- OPEC giants like Mexico and Norway .
Whether such a coalition can turn prices around remains very much open to question , however .
The production cutbacks that these countries and others made in March fell far short of the amounts pledged , and oil prices , which initially jumped , ultimately gave back all their gains .
Some oil industry analysts say that the coordinated production cutbacks of these countries have kept prices from falling even lower .
Moreover , a second round of cuts has been announced for July .
Others , however , dismiss the current effort as doomed in the face of such compelling market factors as the slowdown in Asia , the increase in energy conservation and the development of technology that has made the discovery and extraction of oil far more efficient .
In any case , after many years of widespread cheating on production quotas by its members , the once-mighty OPEC has become virtually powerless to influence the oil market by itself .
Prices have plunged more than 48 percent from a 52-week high of about $ 23 a barrel in October , falling below $ 12 in the last week .
But Monday , in anticipation of the meeting , oil prices surged $ 1.59 , or 13.4 percent , to $ 13.43 a barrel , the biggest one-day gain since Jan. 22 , 1991 .
Prices have now jumped 18 percent since hitting their low last week .
`` This may be the end of the old OPEC , but a wider organization may take its place that may be more effective , '' said John Lichtblau , the chairman of the Petroleum Industry Research Foundation , a Manhattan -based research group for the oil industry .
He has attended OPEC meetings for the last 15 years .
`` They all realize that they are in the same boat , '' Lichtblau said , alluding to countries like Mexico and Norway .
`` It 's just as important to them to keep up oil prices . ''
While there were efforts in the 1980s to have non- OPEC countries cooperate in production cuts , they had only a limited effect because some of them ignored their quotas when crude oil prices began to rebound .
Still , Ann - Louise Hittle , the director of crude oil research at Cambridge Energy Associates , an energy consulting group based in Cambridge , Mass. , said the OPEC and non- OPEC countries `` have come up with agreements to cut which are more or less sticking . ''
`` This seems to be lasting , '' she said .
`` This could be a historic turning point . ''
Others , however , have strong doubts .
`` They have to do major surgery and up to now they have been dealing with Band - Aids , '' said Fareed Mohamedi , the managing director of market and country analysis for the Petroleum Finance Company Ltd , a consulting group for the oil industry in Washington .
`` There 's not much new that has emerged . ''
Mohamedi noted that even though oil exporters inside and outside OPEC agreed in late March to cut oil output by a total of 1.7 million barrels a day , less than one million barrels was taken out of production .
Thus , this latest effort to rein in oil supplies has raised skepticism similar to that faced by OPEC , which for years has been unable to hold its members to output quotas .
Going into the meeting there are firm commitments from eight nations for a second round of cuts totaling about 740,000 barrels a day , or about 1 percent of the 74 million barrels consumed each day in the world .
There is a wide consensus among analysts and other outside experts that a cut of at least 1 million barrels a day has to emerge from the meeting to keep oil prices from sliding further .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">The task was not made easier when Norway , the largest exporter in Europe , said that it would not join other countries in another round of production cuts , as it had done in March</ENAMEX> .
OPEC has found it increasingly difficult to raise oil prices because of its own internal divisions .
Major producers often ignored the production quotas that were set at meetings , eroding the credibility of the group .
In an effort to regain some of its influence , OPEC decided to raise its production quotas by 10 percent last November to 27.5 million barrels a day from 25 million , a move that merely acknowledged how much the members were already producing .
As oil prices began to slide in the spring , Saudi Arabia and Venezuela were each waiting for the other to act first to cut back .
The standoff was broken by Mexico , which made an offer for cutbacks that brought the two major OPEC producers together in an unusual coalition to begin a round of cuts without first getting the approval of the other OPEC countries .
While some experts see the coalition as a new , more realistic approach , it has caused friction within OPEC .
Some members have objected that they are not consulted but are then asked to join in an effort to cut back .
There is agreement , however , that if the OPEC members do not come up with further large cuts at the meeting , oil prices can slide further , perhaps even below $ 10 a barrel .
While this will benefit oil importers like Japan , the United States and Europe , it would cause deep economic pain and more political instability among the producing countries .
