VIENNA , Austria --
Despite a deep split between Saudi Arabia and Iran , the president of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries said the group had agreed on a plan to increase oil production that should at least halt the recent surge in prices .
`` I believe we have an agreement , '' said Ali Rodriguez , Venezuela 's oil minister and the newly named president of OPEC .
Although the oil ministers said they were still discussing last-minute details , officials said the increase in quotas would be very close to the Saudi demands for an additional 1.7 million barrels a day .
In practice , the increase would be much more modest , because OPEC countries already cheat on their quotas by about 1 million barrels a day .
Much if not most of that cheating is expected to cease once the official quotas are increased .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Most analysts say the increase will bring only a modest relief in gasoline prices , which have soared since OPEC and allied nations like Mexico and Norway slashed production by 2.1 million barrels one year ago</ENAMEX> .
The expected increase would also fall well short of pleas from the United States , where the White House and the Department of Energy have waged a loud campaign for a real increase of as much as 2.5 million barrels daily .
Nevertheless , the increases would entirely reverse the cuts imposed last year by the 11 OPEC members , and they are likely to be followed by proportionate increases by Mexico and Norway .
Iraq has also said it will raise its daily production by about 700,000 barrels , although analysts are skeptical .
Iraq exports oil under special U.N. restrictions that stem from the Persian Gulf War and permit it to spend the revenue only on food , medicine and other humanitarian needs .
Though Iraq is a member of OPEC , it is allowed to export as much oil as it wants .
Tuesday 's apparent agreement comes after a bitter test of wills in which Saudi officials threatened to shatter OPEC 's unity by pushing through an increase with or without Iran 's agreement .
The battle turned on politics as much as economics , and much of that battle within OPEC was about whether countries could or would be seen as capitulating to heavy-handed U.S. demands .
-LRB- BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- Saudi officials adamantly wanted to raise prices , in part because the United States is its biggest market and in part because of concern about political wrath from Congress , where some lawmakers have pushed for legislation to block aid and sales of military equipment .
Iranian leaders denounced U.S. demands and insisted that OPEC should not makes its decision in response to political pressure .
But analysts and Saudi leaders argued here that Iran is already producing near its maximum capacity of about 3 million barrels a day and has nothing to gain from an increase in total production .
As a result , any increase in production would come from other countries -- Saudi Arabia in particular -- and merely lead to lower prices for what Iran was already selling .
Saudi Arabia and Iran are OPEC 's two largest producers , but Saudi Arabia is by far the biggest , with a daily output of 7.6 million barrels .
It has enough spare capacity to flood world markets in a matter of weeks .
Saudi officials , alarmed when prices suddenly surged to about $ 30 a barrel in recent months , demanded an increase in output that would prevent worldwide shortages and stabilize prices .
-LRB- END OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- In Washington , White House officials said they were satisfied with the apparent agreement .
In recent days , they have argued privately that their lobbying campaign helped move the consensus within OPEC away from a broad resistance to any increases just two months ago .
But within OPEC , many leaders are still fuming about what they view as heavy-handed pressure that only made their political situation more awkward .
Venezuelan leaders have been particularly sensitive about being portrayed as puppets of the U.S. government , and went out of their way last week to criticize lobbying efforts by the U.S. secretary of energy , Bill Richardson .
On Monday , Iranian officials almost gleefully pounced on the issue of U.S. pressure when Richardson reportedly called the oil minister of Qatar just as he was meeting with his counterparts .
Though modest , the proposed increases are still significant .
Oil prices have already skidded about 18 percent since March 8 , falling from $ 34 to about $ 28 .
Most of that decline reflects expectations that OPEC would agree on an increase of roughly this magnitude .
Saudi officials have made clear that they would like to see the price of oil settle at around $ 25 a barrel .
They believe that price could remain stable and would allow the world 's big consuming nations to rebuild their badly depleted reserves .
