VIENNA , Austria --
Complaining about U.S. pressure on the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries , Iran said Wednesday that it would join other OPEC members and increase crude oil production to avoid losing its share of the market .
`` We are going to take our market share , '' Iran 's OPEC governor , Hossein Kazempour Ardebili , said in an interview .
`` We are going to keep and preserve our market share .
Beyond that , we will see what will happen . ''
His remark left open the possibility that Iran could threaten to go beyond its share of the total increase of 1.7 million barrels a day sought by a Saudi -led coalition in OPEC .
Without Iran , the cartel announced on Tuesday that production would rise by 1.45 million barrels a day .
Iran 's decision was quickly felt in London trading , where the price of oil dropped 4 percent Wednesday morning to below $ 25 a barrel .
One OPEC official predicted that by May , the cartel 's own basket price for oil could drop to $ 20 per barrel .
Ardebili complained about the pressure that the United States had put on OPEC members to increase oil production .
`` This is not a question in a debate about production , '' he said .
`` This is a question of influence . ''
He said that OPEC `` should not have been put in the position of being pushed to do it . ''
Iran 's representative complained that on Tuesday , the U.S. energy secretary , Bill Richardson , had telephoned OPEC 's president , Ali Rodriguez of Venezuela , while the cartel was meeting behind closed doors .
Richardson , he said , made a similar call to the oil minister of Qatar during a ministerial meeting on Monday .
`` We do n't like it , '' Ardebili said .
After two days of discussion , OPEC announced on Tuesday that 9 of its 11 members would increase oil production by a total of 1.45 million barrels a day without the participation of Iran , the cartel 's second-largest producer .
That forced Iran , which wanted a much smaller increase , to follow their lead Wednesday .
The higher production would begin next month .
`` We do n't want to send a signal that we are out for ruining the cohesion of the organization , '' Ardebili said , `` but we expressed concern about a huge increase in one step . ''
The increase was not as large as the United States had hoped , and it was not expected to bring down gasoline prices anytime soon .
With Iran , the total increase is expected to be about 1.7 million barrels .
Analysts said earlier that even without Iran , the actual increase would end up at the higher level because other OPEC members were likely to seize the opportunity to cheat on their quotas to fill the gap .
The United States had pressed for increases of up to 2.5 million barrels a day to reduce gasoline prices , which have soared to more than $ 1.60 a gallon in most cities .
Iran 's irritation at the U.S. pressure was apparently a major reason behind its opposition to any increase .
-LRB- BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- Experts estimated that it would take at least six to eight weeks before the effects of increased oil production are felt at the gasoline pumps .
With gasoline supplies already unusually low in the United States ahead of the summer driving season , prices are not expected to decline soon .
Some analysts predicted that the retail price would continue to rise before it eased by the autumn .
`` Anybody who expects to get back to gasoline at $ 1 or $ 1.20 a gallon will be seriously disappointed , '' said Raad Alkadiri , an analyst at Petroleum Finance Co. , an industry research firm based in Washington .
`` Whatever happens , you 're going to have a tight gasoline market this summer . ''
The Clinton administration was more optimistic and said that several oil producing nations that do not belong to OPEC would also increase their outputs .
`` I think our quiet diplomacy worked , '' Richardson , the energy secretary , said at a White House briefing Tuesday evening .
Richardson said that when all sources of production are taken into account the United States `` will be well above our objective '' for increased production .
He and other officials noted that prices were already down from a high of $ 34 a barrel in anticipation of increased production .
-LRB- END OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- The unusual break in OPEC ranks on Tuesday came after two days of wrangling between Iran and Saudi Arabia , the largest producer , which had pushed for an increase in production .
The production of Iraq , which says it now produces 2.4 million barrels a day , has been separately governed by U.N. resolutions in place since the 1991 Persian Gulf War .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">OPEC cut production last year and was joined by several non- OPEC nations like Mexico and Norway , sending oil and gasoline prices soaring to their highest levels in years</ENAMEX> .
