VIENNA , Austria --
Despite unusually public pleas by the Clinton administration for relief from high oil prices , there were few signs of support for a big increase in oil production as ministers from petroleum-exporting countries arrived here Saturday for crucial meetings .
Two days before the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is scheduled to consider an increase in output , members of the 11-nation cartel remained divided and were girding for grueling negotiations throughout the weekend .
`` I think it is too early to decide now , '' said Obaid bin Saif al- Nasseri , the United Arab Emirates ' oil minister , as he entered his hotel early Saturday afternoon .
`` We have not discussed all the possibilities and all the options .
My recommendation is to wait for some time . ''
As in the past , the most important disagreements are between Saudi Arabia and Iran , the two largest producers within OPEC .
Saudi officials have been pushing for an increase in production of between 1 million and 1.5 million barrels a day .
Iran has repeatedly argued for much smaller increases , and its position has hardened as oil prices have retreated from recent highs of more than $ 30 a barrel .
Iran has also lashed out at the United States , where lawmakers are pushing for sanctions against OPEC countries and where Secretary of Energy Bill Richardson has lobbied OPEC countries in a whirlwind tour .
`` OPEC should not opt for a big increase under political pressure , '' said Iran 's oil minister , Bijan Zangeneh , on the country 's state radio before departing for Vienna Saturday .
Warning that a rash increase could lead to a `` catastrophe , '' Zangeneh said OPEC nations `` must move with the market and seek stability .
We hope OPEC will make a decision based on economic justifications , not political . ''
Even boosting production by one million to 1.5 million barrels a day would not necessarily have much impact on oil prices .
Analysts say the crucial question is whether the increase comes on top of or merely substitutes for the cheating on oil quotas that is already taking place .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Industry analysts estimate that OPEC countries and the four nations that joined in the production cuts one year ago -- Mexico , Russia , Oman and Norway -- are already overshooting their target of 23 million barrels a day by about 1 million barrels</ENAMEX> .
If OPEC leaders agree to increase quotas by 1.5 million barrels but clamp down on cheating , the net effect would be negligible .
Even if the increase comes on top of the current overproduction , most analysts believe , the impact on oil prices will be modest and the reduction in gasoline prices no more than a few pennies a gallon .
Philip Verleger , a veteran oil economist at the Brattle Group in Newport Beach , Calif. , noted that inventories of crude oil have declined to dangerous new lows at the same time as an acceleration in global economic growth is expected to increase demand .
The International Energy Agency , a research agency in Paris financed by oil-consuming countries , has predicted that worldwide demand for oil will climb by 4 million barrels a day , to 75 million barrels , from now and December .
If worldwide inventories are not restocked , Verleger argued , consuming nations could find themselves under increasing pressure to turn to Iraq .
Iraq , which remains under U.N. sanctions , is allowed to produce as much as it can under tight restrictions on what it is supposed to spend the revenue on .
`` If we do n't increase inventories now , we may need Iraq 's oil by Christmas , '' Verleger said .
But even non- OPEC countries are extremely worried that any big increase in production will send prices plunging back to the levels of just one year ago -- $ 11 a barrel .
Olav Akselsen , Norway 's oil minister , politely rebuffed Richardson on Thursday after meeting with him in Oslo , Norway .
Richardson has been traveling widely in recent weeks to urge oil-rich nations to increase production .
Though acknowledging the need for some sort of increase , Akselsen said Norway did not support rolling back all of the production cuts that sent oil prices from a devastating nadir of $ 11 a barrel to the current level of about $ 28 a barrel .
`` Total suspension of today 's production regulations will have a negative impact on the market and work against price stability , '' Akselsen said in Oslo on Thursday .
`` Both too high and too low oil prices will lead to more instability . ''
