GAITHERSBURG , Md .
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Some frequent American travelers to Britain should be prohibited from donating blood as an extra safety precaution against the possible spread of a fatal brain illness linked to mad cow disease , a Food and Drug Administration advisory panel says .
The panel made its decision in a 12-9 vote Wednesday , even though it had no evidence that the deadly illness , a new variant of Creutzfeldt - Jakob disease , could spread through blood .
Panel members stressed that the precaution does n't mean frequent tourists are at risk of getting the illness just because they ate British beef , where mad cow disease resides .
But scientists simply do n't know enough about this new illness that has struck at least 39 Britons who apparently ate beef contaminated with mad cow disease to say for sure that it could never be transmitted through blood .
Some experiments have allowed scientists to transmit similar illnesses to animals through blood .
`` The day you find out there is -LRB- human -RRB- transmission , you 're years too late '' to protect the blood supply , warned Dr. Linda Detwiler of the Agriculture Department .
If the FDA follows its advisers ' recommendation , the next question is how long someone had to visit Britain to be deemed enough of a risk to refuse their blood .
That 's crucial because an American Red Cross study found almost 23 percent of recent blood donors had traveled to Britain at least once between 1980 and 1996 .
From the late 1980s through 1996 , Britain battled a mad cow disease epidemic in its cattle .
The advisory panel said the concern is not a typical week-long tourist trip .
A majority of panelists said Americans who spent a total of more than six months in Britain between 1980 and 1996 should be blocked from donating blood -- a recommendation that , if followed , could cut the U.S. blood supply by 2.2 percent , the Red Cross said .
Mad cow disease is an infection that kills by literally eating holes in the brain tissue of cattle .
About one in 1 million people around the world gets a similar brain disease called Creutzfeldt - Jakob disease , or CJD. Although CJD sometimes is hereditary , usually its cause is not known .
The worry about blood stems from Britain 's discovery in the mid-1990s that some people caught a new strain of the disease called `` new variant CJD '' apparently by eating beef infected with mad cow disease .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">There is no known mad cow disease in U.S. cattle , and the United States has not allowed importation of British beef for over a decade .</ENAMEX>
No American has caught new variant CJD .
But because these brain diseases can incubate for years without causing symptoms , some scientists say the possibility exists that years from now they will discover a link between blood transfusions and infection .
Doctors are closely watching Britain to see if that happens .
Canadian health officials last month decided they too would determine how to block blood donations from certain Canadian travelers .
