LONDON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- <ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">The British government is ready to lift a ban on selling beef on the bone after concluding there is no further danger of spreading `` mad cow '' disease .</ENAMEX>
But it has hit resistance from regional medical officers .
`` We could just lift the ban in England , but it makes more sense to proceed in an orderly way to lift the ban across the whole of the United Kingdom , '' Agriculture Minister Nick Brown said Tuesday .
Professor Liam Donaldson , the chief medical officer in England , reportedly has recommended that the ban could be safely lifted .
Chief medical officers in Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland , however , think the ban should continue for now .
The government banned the sale of beef on the bone -- including rib roasts and T -bone steaks -- in December 1997 based on scientific advice that a slight chance existed bone marrow could transmit the lethal brain disease to humans .
The Spongiform Encephalopathy Advisory Committee said at the time that there was a low risk of infection from beef on the bone .
It estimated a 5 percent chance of a single case arising in one year .
A new strain of Creutzfeldt - Jakob disease has been linked to the British outbreak of bovine spongiform encephalopathy , or mad cow disease .
The spongiform diseases eat holes in the brains of victims , and no cure has been discovered .
Forty -three people have died of the new variant in Britain since 1995 , including four this year , according to the Department of Health .
Other forms of CJD not related to mad cow disease have claimed 22 victims this year .
Last month , the European Union lifted a ban on British beef exports that had been imposed in 1996 because of fears of disease .
The new Welsh National Assembly has called for the ban to be lifted as soon as possible , but Alun Michael , the head of the Welsh regional government , says it should not be done until new scientific reports are received .
The delay in lifting the ban is one of the first practical problems to arise from the government 's decision to return some powers to new regional governments in Wales , Scotland and Northern Ireland .
