BRUSSELS , September 26 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- <ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Belgium said Tuesday it had found its fifth case of mad cow disease since the start of this year , sending the country 's total figure to 15 .</ENAMEX>
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The Agriculture Ministry said that health officials found a seven-year -old cow with signs of bovine spongiform encephalopathy -LRB- BSE -RRB- Monday in a farm near Bioul in southern Belgium </ENAMEX>.
The animal and the 74 other cows in the herd were to be slaughtered later Tuesday , the ministry said in a statement .
In Belgium 's neighboring country Britain , the BSE epidemic is starting to drop off in line with scientists ' predictions , but the number of known cases of `` variant '' CJD , the human form of the disease , has increased to 74 in Britain , according to a latest scientific report .
The new study by the British Ministry of Agriculture , Fisheries and Food came Monday after government officials played down fears that up to eight more cows may have contracted BSE because of inadequate measures to eradicated it .
The progress report outlined the measures taken to protect public health in the six months from December 1999 .
It said that BSE cases have already shown a dramatic decline and that the situation was due to improve further in the future .
On average about 30 new cases were being found each month , compared to 1,000 a month at the height of the epidemic in 1993 , the report said .
The epidemic led to a serious food crisis in Britain after the first case of mad cow disease was found in the island country in 1996 .
The 15-nation European Union has taken several steps to monitor and control the EU -wide spread of the mad cow disease since then .
However , 63 people had died of CJD by the end of June 2000 , with three provisional victims who had already died and a further seven still alive but believed to have the disease , according to the British report .
The British government said last Sunday that there was no new outbreak of BSE and there was only one confirmed case of BSE in July in Britain .
