http://www.nytimes.com/2009/01/31/world/asia/31nkorea.html?hp

N. Korea Scraps Accords With South
 
By CHOE SANG-HUN
Published: January 30, 2009

SEOUL — North Korea sharpened its hostility toward South Korea on Friday by abruptly declaring that it was scrapping a nonaggression pact and all other agreements the two countries have signed to ease military and political tensions on the divided peninsula.

The announcement followed a recent series of sharp comments and aggressive gestures by North Korea, which officials and analysts in Seoul said were aimed at getting the attention of the new American administration and winning concessions from President Lee Myung Bak of South Korea.

“Relations between the north and south have worsened to the point where there is no way or hope of correcting them,” said a statement from the Committee for the Peaceful Reunification of Korea, the North Korean agency in charge of relations with the South. “They have reached the extreme point where the clash of fire against fire, steel against steel, has become inevitable.”

A South Korean Navy destroyer has sailed into waters near the disputed western sea border with North Korea — the scene of naval skirmishes in 1999 and 2002 — to bolster defenses, the national news agency Yonhap reported on Friday, without citing sources.

“What we can say is that we are beefing up our readiness,” a South Korean military spokesman, who spoke on the customary condition of anonymity, said while declining to confirm the Yonhap report.

Since the 1970s, the two Koreas have signed a series of agreements for non-aggression and cooperation, which the North’s Communist regime has flouted repeatedly, rendering the pacts little more than symbolic. Still, this was the first time North Korea has said that it was officially nullifying the accords.

President Lee Myung Bak of South Korea, who has largely ignored the recent North Korean threats, called the Friday statement “nothing new.” He urged the North to reopen dialogue.

“Of all the countries in the world, who cares the most sincerely about North Korea? The United States? Japan? China? Russia?” said Mr. Lee in a live television round-table discussion. “North Korea must realize that it’s South Korea.”

Kim Ho Nyeon, the South Korean government’s main spokesman on inter-Korean relations, said: “We hope the North will realize that spawning and raising tensions between South and North Korea is not appropriate for peace not only on the Korean peninsula but also in Northeast Asia and the rest of the world.”

Mr. Lee predicted that dialogue with North Korea would resume “before long.” But some analysts said that the chances of North Korea possibly starting a limited border skirmish to prove its points were rising.

North Korea’s hostility toward the South has increased since Mr. Lee took office in Seoul a year ago. He vowed to take a tougher stance on North Korea, a position that effectively reversed 10 years of his liberal predecessors’ efforts to engage the North, often with generous economic aid.

Two weeks ago, the North Korean military declared an “all-out confrontational posture” toward the South. Pyongyang also told a visiting American scholar that it had “weaponized” enough plutonium for four or five nuclear bombs.

Taunts and threats from North Korea, which has vowed to turn South Korea into a “sea of fire” or a “heap of ashes,” are a recurring feature of postwar relations between the two Koreas. They seldom are a cause for alarm among South Koreans. Pyongyang has even called the oldest and primary agreement for peace — the 1953 armistice that ended the three-year Korean War — a “useless piece of paper.”

Still, the South Korean military has increased its vigilance along the border in recent weeks. So far, it has reported no unusual movement by the North’s 1.1 million-member People’s Army.

On Friday, the North Korean committee said it was scrapping the inter-Korean agreements because Mr. Lee had violated them with his “reckless confrontational rackets against our republic.”

Its statement said the North would nullify “all the agreed points concerning the issue of putting an end to the political and military confrontation between the north and the south.”

Government analysts in Seoul were scrambling to figure out the North’s intentions. They said it remained unclear whether the North was nullifying the agreements its supreme leader, Kim Jong Il, signed with Mr. Lee’s two predecessors, in 2000 and 2007, during rare inter-Korean summits.

Those two agreements have formed the basis for a decade-long rapprochement on the peninsula. During this so-called sunshine period, billions of dollars of trade and economic aid — as well as millions of South Koreans on vacation tours or for family reunions — crossed the heavily armed border.

The North did specify whether the inter-Korean accords to be nullified included a 1991 agreement on reconciliation and nonaggression, as well as a promise contained in an appendix to that deal that it would honor the western sea border claimed by South Korea until the two sides negotiated a mutually acceptable maritime demarcation line.

North Korea has long flouted those agreements by developing nuclear weapons and causing naval clashes on the disputed sea border in 1999 and 2002. After the 1999 confrontation, it unilaterally redrew the sea border.

Won Tae Jae, a spokesman for the Ministry of Defense in Seoul, said at a briefing on Friday that the South would respond “resolutely” if the North violated its western sea border again.

“We will see more tension in western waters,” said Lee Byong Chul, senior fellow at the Institute for Peace and Cooperation, a nonpartisan policy advisory body based in Seoul. “It doesn’t appear that it will just end up as empty words from the North.”

He predicted that North Korea would focus on improving ties with the Obama administration, while snubbing Mr. Lee.

