The FAO statement came as Turkey set up a bird flu crisis center in
its capital Ankara and the World Health Organization said two more
people had died from bird flu in China. (article 8) 

(CBS/AP) A senior
U.N. official said Wednesday that about $1.5 billion is needed now to
help countries and international organizations fight bird flu and
prepare for a pandemic in humans. (article 32) 

  Compare: A day after a United Nations official called for $1.5
  billion to help poor countries and international organizations fight
  bird flu, Indonesia reported what is said to be at least the twelfth
  death there from bird flu.

BEIJING - China's bird flu outlook is "not optimistic" and human cases
may increase if there are more poultry outbreaks, Xinhua news agency
said on Tuesday, the day after the country's eighth human case was
announced. (article 40)

(AP) Up to 77 people in Japan may have been infected with a mild form
of bird flu, in what could be the world's first case of human
infection of the H5N2 virus, health officials said Tuesday. (article
16) 

Bulgaria launched a bird flu prevention campaign Tuesday, which
includes general information on bird flu and advice on avoiding
contact with birds, following strict hygiene and eating only
well-cooked poultry products and eggs. (article 16)

GERMANY: German Chancellor Angela Merkel says Germany and the European
Union must do everything possible to reduce the risk of bird flu by
preventing the illegal import of birds and poultry products. (article
15)

  Compare: Bulgaria has banned all imports of bird meat and eggs from
  Turkey and Romania, and is disinfecting all vehicles entering from
  both countries, Baychev added.

  Compare: Bulgaria has banned imports of live birds and poultry from
  Greece, Turkey, Romania and Macedonia, which has reported a
  suspected bird flu outbreak.

  Compare: The EU said it would ban imports of live birds and poultry
  products from Romania, where thousands of birds have already been
  culled.
