BBC
Last Updated: Thursday, 2 February 2006, 19:22 GMT
E-mail this to a friend 	Printable version
Oil tanker runs aground in Alaska
Map of Alaska
An oil tanker has run aground at a port in Alaska, the US Coast Guard says.

The Seabulk Pride broke free from moorings while being loaded in Nikiski, south-west of Anchorage, and ran aground on silt.

The double-hulled tanker was carrying more than 100,000 barrels of different oil products. There were no immediate reports of any leak.

A spillage from the Exxon Valdez in Alaska in 1989 devastated wildlife and took four years to clean up.

A spokesman for the Tesoro refinery said the vessel broke free after being hit by an ice floe.

Chief Petty Officer Darrell Wilson of the United States Coast Guard said it was not yet known whether the ship had remained intact.

Coast Guard investigators are on their way to the site.

The 575-foot long tanker was built in 1998 with two hulls, a design brought in during the 1990s to protect cargoes. 



Reuters -- 8 minutes ago
UPDATE 3-Tanker runs aground in Alaska, spills oil products
Thu Feb 2, 2006 4:22 PM ET
Printer Friendly  |  Email Article  |  Reprints  |  RSS
	(Page 1 of 2) 		 
(Adds quote from Coast Guard, paragraph 3)

By Yereth Rosen

ANCHORAGE, Alaska, Feb 2 (Reuters) - An oil tanker carrying nearly 5 million gallons of oil and gasoline was struck by an ice floe while loading at an Alaska refinery and ran aground on Thursday, causing a small spill, a state official and the refining company said.

The Coast Guard said an ice floe parted the mooring line and sent the 600-foot (183-meter) tanker adrift before it went aground about a half mile (800 meters) north of the dock. The vessels tanks were secure.

"Our captain of the port is on scene and he says that the hull is intact. So there's no product leaking from the vessel at this time," Coast Guard Petty Officer Gail Dale said.

The double-hulled tanker, the Seabulk Pride, was loading heavy vacuum gas oil and unleaded gasoline from the refinery in Nikiski, Alaska, on the Cook Inlet, refinery owner Tesoro Corp. (TSO.N: Quote, Profile, Research) said in a statement.


news.com.au -- 11 minutes ago

Oil spill after tanker runs aground
From: Reuters
From correspondents in Anchorage

February 03, 2006
 

AN oil tanker carrying more than 90 million litres of oil and petrol was struck by an ice floe and ran aground causing a spill while loading oil products at an Alaska refinery today.
"At this time we do not have an estimate as to the amount of product released," refinery owner Tesoro Corp said in a statement.

The Tesoro-chartered double-hulled tanker, the Seabulk Pride, was loading heavy vacuum gas oil and unleaded petrol from the refinery in Nikiski, Alaska, on the Cook Inlet, the company said.

It said the ice floe parted the mooring line and sent the 183m tanker adrift before it went aground about 800 metres north of the dock, and that the vessel's tanks were secure.

Ice conditions at the time of the accident were "extreme" with a lot of ice floating in the water, said Lynda Giguere of the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation.

The Coast Guard said there were no immediate reports of injury.

Advertisement:
The Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation sent two tugboats and a helicopter to the scene.

In 1989, the Exxon Valdez supertanker grounded on a reef in Alaska's Prince William Sound, spilling about 50 million litres of crude oil. 


UPDATE 2-Tanker runs aground in Alaska, spills oil products
Thu Feb 2, 2006 3:21 PM ET
Printer Friendly  |  Email Article  |  Reprints  |  RSS
			 

(Adds details, stock price)

By Yereth Rosen

ANCHORAGE, Alaska, Feb 2 (Reuters) - An oil tanker carrying nearly 5 million gallons of oil and gasoline was struck by an ice floe and ran aground while loading oil products at an Alaska refinery on Thursday, causing a spill, a state official and the refining company said.

"At this time we do not have an estimate as to the amount of product released," refinery owner Tesoro Corp. (TSO.N: Quote, Profile, Research) said in a statement.

The Tesoro-chartered double-hulled tanker, the Seabulk Pride, was loading heavy vacuum gas oil and unleaded gasoline from the refinery in Nikiski, Alaska, on the Cook Inlet, the company said.

It said the ice floe parted the mooring line and sent the 600-foot (183-meter) tanker adrift before it went aground about half a mile (800 metres) north of the dock, and that the vessel's tanks were secure.

Ice conditions at the time of the accident were "extreme," with a lot of ice floating in the water, said Lynda Giguere of the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation. The tanker is owned by Seabulk International Co., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Seacor Holdings Inc. (CKH.N: Quote, Profile, Research)

Coast Guard Petty Office Thomas McKenzie, based in Juneau, said it was unclear whether other shipments in the area would be disrupted because of the grounding. The Coast Guard said there were no immediate reports of injury.

The tanker was carrying nearly 4 million gallons of Vacuum Tower Bottom Blend, a residual, asphalt-like oil that is not refined at Tesoro's Nikiski facility.

It was was also carrying nearly a million gallons of bunker oil, gasoline, heavy vacuum gas oil and diesel fuel, the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation said.

Tesoro said its loading lines and docks were secure.

The Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation sent two tugboats and a helicopter to the scene.

In 1989, the Exxon Valdez supertanker grounded on a reef in Alaska's Prince William Sound, spilling about 11 million gallons (50 million liters) of crude oil.