UNITED NATIONS
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Sierra Leone 's newly restored president appealed to world leaders Thursday to keep troops in the devastated West African country and help it rebuild itself after 30 years of coups and violence .
Ahmed Tejan Kabbah said , it is important to maintain the West African coalition army which drove Lt. Col. Johnny Koroma 's military junta from power more than six months ago and is trying to keep his allies from attacking civilians .
`` We cannot talk about peace-building without reference to the material elements -- the blocks , mortars and tools -- needed for the foundation of a solid structure of national development , '' he said at a special conference Thursday on rebuilding Sierra Leone .
`` We fear that unless assistance for -LRB- the troops -RRB- is forthcoming , as a matter of urgency , rebel activities will not only continue and create more human tragedy , but will also drain our limited resources , '' Kabbah said .
In addition , he said Sierra Leone urgently needed `` continued humanitarian assistance , including medicines , health care serves and food . ''
British Foreign Office Minister Tony Lloyd said his government could give up to 6.5 million pounds -LRB- dlrs 10.4 million -RRB- over two years , in addition to the 2 million pounds -LRB- dlrs 3.2 million -RRB- already provided , to help Sierra Leone maintain its security and troops .
Since Kabbah was restored to power , former junta members and their rebels allies have been killing , maiming and raping thousands of civilians in remote areas .
U.N. Secretary - General Kofi Annan , who gave the opening speech , took note of the plight of Sierra Leone 's citizens .
`` Since last March , 500 victims of mutilations -- including amputations -- have been admitted to hospitals .
And they may be the lucky ones , '' Annan said .
`` It has been estimated that for every one victim able to obtain assistance , four or five civilians have died or remain in the bush terrified of meeting another human being . ''
A Human Rights Watch report released Tuesday said Kabbah 's forces have also taken part in extrajudicial killings and torture of rebels soldiers and their suspected allies .
Kabbah said his government has been treating former junta members fairly .
`` I am proud to say that Sierra Leone as a nation , under the present democratically elected government , is based on the rule of law , '' Kabbah said .
Kabbah insisted that his government has `` resisted the popular clamor for revenge '' but noted that some former junta members and their allies surrendered for fear of their personal safety , `` and for fear that the citizens against whom they had perpetrated much atrocities , might take revenge . ''
Kabbah said trials for junta members are `` transparent and fair . ''
`` They are held in public , with the accused persons given every opportunity and facility to defend themselves , '' he said .
Annan said he was `` particularly encouraged '' by the government 's recent decision to offer an amnesty for child soldiers from all combatant groups .
The Security Council recently agreed to send military observers to Sierra Leone to help disarm warring factions .
