SALT LAKE CITY
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- A coalition of community activists has repeated its call for the resignations of top Salt Lake Organizing Committee officials if probes into bribery in Salt Lake 's bid find any wrongdoing .
The Salt Lake Impact 2002 and Beyond Coalition also asked that SLOC president Frank Joklik , senior vice president Dave Johnson and legal counsel Kelly Flint not conduct Olympic business until the four investigations are complete and it is decided if they should resign .
The group also wants SLOC to open its documents and meetings to the public and abolish all consultants ' pay -- specifically targeting former SLOC president Tom Welch .
Welch resigned after pleading no contest to spouse abuse , then signed a $ 10,000-a-month consulting contract with SLOC .
`` This is an opportunity to have no more surprises , '' coalition director Glenn Bailey said Saturday .
`` We should be aboveboard , open , we should know what 's happened and what kind of work is being done to get us to 2002 successfully . ''
Shelley Thomas , SLOC vice president of communications , said any changes would come after the investigations are complete .
The Justice Department and FBI , U.S. Olympic Committee , International Olympic Committee and SLOC 's ethics board are all investigating claims that Salt Lake 's bid committee tried to buy the votes of IOC members who selected the site of the 2002 Winter Games .
Bid committee members have acknowledged giving $ 400,000 in college tuition to 13 people , including six relatives of IOC members .
Other perks for IOC visitors included free medical care , expensive gifts such as guns and skis , and at least one child of an IOC member received an internship in city government .
The coalition represents a range of minority , poverty and disability rights groups including Justice , Economic Dignity & Independence for Women and Utah Issues .
It is the second time in a month the group has called for resignations .
The group 's members were less than optimistic that the probes by the Olympic agencies would be thorough or have real bite .
They also called for the state 's Tax Commission to audit SLOC .
`` As a Utahan I am offended by the actions of -LRB- SLOC -RRB- , '' Barbara Toomer of the Disabled Rights Action Committee said .
`` Just because everybody does it , is not an excuse . ...
They 're acting like a bunch of lemmings jumping off a cliff . ''
The coalition members repeated their call for the resignation of two members of SLOC 's board of trustees -- construction company owner Alan Layton and Snowbasin ski resort owner Earl Holding -- for apparent conflicts of interest .
Layton 's company has contracts with SLOC and Holding 's resort has benefited from a federal land swap and government funding for a new access road tied to the Games , the group 's members complained .
Bailey sent a letter Dec. 31 to Gordon Hall , chairman of SLOC 's ethics panel , Gov. Mike Leavitt and Mayor Deedee Corradini asking that the investigation look beyond whether laws to a `` broader , more universal context of the Olympic principles . ''
The ethics board determined last year there were no improprieties involving Holding or Welch 's consulting contract .
