JERUSALEM
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Israeli Cabinet ministers assembled around a TV set and watched a video of a Palestinian mob ambushing an Israeli soldier .
When the tape stopped , the decision was unanimous : Israel would suspend its West Bank troop withdrawal .
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Thursday that the attack near the West Bank city of Ramallah , in which the trapped soldier was pulled out of a car and repeatedly struck in the head with rocks , was a direct result of incitement by the Palestinian Authority against Israel .
`` I cannot allow myself to see Israeli citizens being lynched , or about to be lynched by a crazed mob that received incitement from Palestinian officials , '' Netanyahu said in explaining his decision to hold up the land-for-security agreement .
Netanyahu said he would only resume implementation of the agreement once Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat publicly dropped plans to announce a state in May and accepted Israel 's criteria for the release of Palestinian prisoners .
Israel has said it will not free those involved in attacks that resulted in death or injury .
The Palestinians demand that Israel free prisoners held for anti- Israeli activities .
The Palestinians appealed to the United States for help and Arafat said Thursday that Netanyahu is `` violating completely '' the Wye agreement .
U.S. State Department spokesman James Rubin sided with the Palestinians , saying the Wye River peace agreement `` should be implemented as signed . ''
The crisis hit just 10 days before U.S. President Bill Clinton was to arrive in the region to oversee the next phase of the peace accord .
David Leavy , a White House spokesman said the Clinton trip was still on .
In mid- December , five percent of the West Bank is to be transferred from Israeli control to joint jurisdiction and Israel is to release 250 more Palestinian prisoners .
In Israel , meanwhile , the new confrontation with the Palestinians has helped stabilize Netanyahu 's shaky coalition .
In response to the Cabinet 's decision to suspend implementation of the Wye agreement , hard-line coalition legislators said they would not support an early elections bill as initially planned .
The legislation was to have come before parliament Monday , but its sponsors said they might delay the vote because they no longer have a majority .
The latest cycle of violence began Wednesday morning when an Arab street cleaner was stabbed to death , apparently by a Jewish extremist , in a mixed Arab - Jewish neighborhood of Jerusalem .
In response , dozens of masked Palestinians blocked Jerusalem roads with burning tires and threw stones at cars .
Israeli police fired rubber bullets .
Early Thursday , a shack in Tel Aviv housing five Palestinian laborers from the Gaza Strip was set on fire , and police said they were investigating whether the arsonists had political motives .
The laborers escaped unharmed .
After the attack on the Israeli soldier on Wednesday , Netanyahu convened his so-called security Cabinet and played a videotape of the incident .
Justice Minister Tsahi Hanegbi said the atmosphere in the Cabinet room was tense during the screening and that those present decided unanimously afterward to hold up implementation of the accord .
However , the Palestinian Authority blamed Israel for the latest crisis , saying it had raised tensions by refusing to release Palestinian prisoners jailed for anti- Israeli activities .
The two sides also argued over whether the attack on the soldier was orchestrated or spontaneous .
The incident began when about 150 Palestinian university students , many supporters of Arafat 's Fatah faction , staged a march in Ramallah to press for prisoner releases .
The group then marched to the outskirts of town to throw stones at Israeli cars , including the one the soldier was riding in .
Netanyahu said the incident was `` organized , orchestrated , planned in advance and fomented by the Palestinian Authority . ''
However , Marwan Barghouti , the Fatah leader in the West Bank , said the incident was triggered by growing anger over Israel 's handling of the prisoner issue .
`` In clashes , rocks are thrown , '' Barghouti said .
`` This car stopped with the soldier and they took his weapon .
It was later returned .
They did not use it to kill . ''
Netanyahu said Thursday that the Palestinian Authority had raised false expectations concerning the prisoners .
`` They have to stop promising them things Israel never promised , '' he said .
`` We would never , ever release terrorist murderers , ever . ''
Arafat brought up the issue earlier this week with Clinton in meetings in Washington , and Palestinian negotiators said the U.S. president promised to do his utmost to resolve the issue .
