JERUSALEM
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- At odds with Israel 's government over the demolition of Arab homes and alleged police racism , Arab lawmakers are threatening to deprive Prime Minister Ehud Barak 's already shaky coalition of key votes it might need for political survival .
Israel 's Arab community leaders complained that Barak has turned his back on them , even though an overwhelming number of Israel 's 1 million Arab citizens voted for him in the May 1999 elections .
In his campaign , Barak had promised to make up for decades of government discrimination in housing , education and budget allocations .
`` We have every right to topple the government , '' Arab legislator Abdel Malik Dahamshe said Thursday .
`` We have been the leading community for 50 years in poverty , in discrimination , in unemployment , in house demolition and we hear just promises .
And Barak is taking us for granted . ''
A strong undercurrent of discontent runs through Israel 's neglected Arab towns and villages , and erupts from time to time .
The latest trigger was the razing of two homes in the Arab village of Kufr Nahaf two weeks ago .
Israeli authorities said the homes were built without a license .
Arab leaders maintain that Israeli zoning favor Jewish communities and make it virtually impossible for Arabs to obtain building permits .
Arab legislator Mohammed Barakeh told community leaders they should have protested the Kufr Nahaf demolitions .
Dahamshe was blunter Thursday .
`` A policeman who comes to demolish my home -- the one who comes to break our arms and legs , it 's our right to protect ourselves and break his arms and legs , '' he said .
Police said they would investigate Barakeh and Dahamshe for incitement .
Arab leaders , in turn , accused the police commander of northern Israel , a region with a large Arab population , of racism and demanded his dismissal .
Earlier this week , the northern police chief , Alik Ron , announced in a news conference that 41 Israeli Arabs had been arrested on suspicion of hoarding arms and conspiring to attack police officers and soldiers .
Ron also referred to the incitement investigation , prompting complaints that he was lumping together civil disobedience and conspiracy to commit murder , and tainting the entire community .
Barak on Thursday defended the police , saying they were just doing their job .
However , he also said that the Arab community is `` loyal to the state , hardworking , under conditions of ongoing deprivation . ''
The growing discontent comes at a time when Barak is trying to rebuild his coalition and regain a parliamentary majority before the parliament -- called the Knesset -- reconvenes in late October .
Three hawkish factions had quit the government in protest over concessions they said Barak was likely to make at July 's Mideast summit at Camp David .
As part of his latest strategy , Barak hopes to build a coalition of 50 legislators in the 120-member parliament , in addition to the 10 Arab lawmakers -- who would not formally be part of his coalition .
A peace treaty with the Palestinians would have to be approved by at least 61 legislators .
Arab lawmakers will back a treaty unconditionally , even if they remain upset with Barak over domestic issues , Barakeh said .
However , as long as there is no peace deal , Barak 's coalition cannot count on the automatic support of the Arab legislators , he said .
The confrontation is a sign of the growing alienation of Israeli Arabs who make up 20 percent of Israel 's population .
Israel 's deputy foreign minister , Nawaf Masalha , an Arab member of Barak 's Labor party , said the prime minister should have paid more attention to the community 's concerns .
`` The government has n't related to them or spoken to them and has taken them for granted even so they are frustrated , '' Masalha told Israel radio .
Arab leaders gathered this week to plan a strategy .
They said they would rebuild destroyed homes and have thousands of people escort Barakeh in a show of force once he is called for police questioning .
`` We want our rights , '' Barakeh said .
`` We are not trying to wage war against the state . ''
