UNITED NATIONS
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- In an effort to halt the use of child soldiers , the General Assembly Thursday approved an amendment calling for governments to take `` all feasible measures '' to prevent troops under the age of 18 from taking part in combat .
The new language in the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child would bar all forced recruitment of minors , whether by regular armies or by rebel forces , and calls on governments to raise the minimum age for voluntary recruitment .
For those governments that do allow people under 18 years old to join the armed forces , the General Assembly urged they at least ensure recruitment is truly voluntary and conducted with parental consent .
According to U.N. figures , more than 300,000 minors -- and some as young as 7 years old -- are reportedly fighting in wars around the world , including in such places as Sierra Leone , Sudan , Colombia , Angola , Sri Lanka and Afghanistan .
The General Assembly adopted a resolution adopting the changes without a vote on Thursday .
The consensus decision paves the way for governments to start signing the protocol beginning June 5 at the start of a major U.N. women 's conference .
U.N. agencies and rights campaigners have been trying for years to raise the age limit on military recruits from 15 to 18 .
The United States , which allows voluntary enlistment at 17 , has been opposed to that limit .
Only the United States and Somalia have yet to ratify the child rights convention .
The United States was among the countries that in January blocked the endorsement of a total ban on recruitment of people under age 18 .
In Sierra Leone , children are routinely used by both rebels and pro-government forces -- as evidenced by a photo published Wednesday in a British newspaper of a boy soldier , who said he was 14 , holding what appeared to be a British -supplied rifle .
Britain , which has sent some 800 troops to Sierra Leone , has committed itself to supplying the country with weapons , ammunition and training as it battles rebels of the Revolutionary United Front .
After the photo was published , the Foreign Office announced it had won assurances from the Sierra Leonean government to not use child soldiers .
