UNITED NATIONS --
As a measure of how dramatically the face of modern warfare has changed in the last decade , the Security Council spent its day Monday debating the rapid increase in the number of child soldiers worldwide and what , if anything , can be done to keep children away from combat .
Experts say as many as 300,000 children in at least 50 countries are directly involved in conflict around the world -- as soldiers , porters and frequently as all-purpose slaves -- in violation of international treaties .
Children are conscripted , cajoled or tricked into volunteering and sometimes sold to armies and guerrilla groups by families thrown into poverty by ethnic conflicts that now kill more civilians than troops .
`` Often children become soldiers just to survive , '' Italy 's representative at the United Nations , Paolo Fulci , told the council , which opened the daylong session with an impassioned speech from Secretary - General Kofi Annan 's newly appointed special representative on children and armed conflict , Olara A. Otunnu .
`` In the last decade alone , we have seen 2 million children killed , over 1 million orphaned , 6 million seriously injured or permanently disabled , 12 million made homeless and 10 million left with serious psychological trauma , '' said Otunnu , a former Ugandan diplomat .
Stephen Lewis , deputy executive director of UNICEF , the U.N. children 's fund , said in an interview Monday that a booming trade in small arms was contributing to a worldwide `` culture of violence and indiscriminate killing at end of the 20th century '' that was putting guns into the hands of children .
`` One tries to fathom what is happening towards children , '' Lewis said .
`` One tries to fathom what it is internationally that allows children to be killed so gratuitously , to be turned into child soldiers , mostly by obligation -- though sometimes they voluntarily join because there is nothing else in the society that gives them a sense of place -- to have them brutalized and to do the brutalizing . ''
Otunnu , who was among the candidates for U.N. secretary-general in 1996 , said he intended to keep the issue on the Security Council agenda , although there is limited scope for council action apart from urging nations to abide by the 1949 Geneva Conventions and the 1989 Convention on the Rights of the Child .
The United States and Somalia are the only two countries that have not signed or ratified the convention on children 's rights .
The Pentagon objects because efforts are under way to amend the treaty to make 18 the minimum age for recruitment .
Americans can be recruited , but not sent into combat , at 17 .
Forty -nine countries recruit children under 18 or accept them as volunteers for their armed forces .
Guerrilla armies are rounding up children as young as 8 or 10 .
Although the Security Council has limited power and no experience in dealing with the problem , members agreed to take children into account when discussing peacekeeping operations or other responses to conflict .
Some members called for a more formal system of impact statements when any international military or relief mission or the imposition of sanctions was being considered by the council .
The growing phenomenon of children at war has begun to attract considerable international attention .
The European Union held a meeting on June 22-23 and agreed to lend assistance to Otunnu 's new office and to put pressure on governments and others who abuse the rights of children .
Monday , Japan 's representative , Hisashi Owada , announced a $ 100,000 grant to Otunnu and offered to stage an international symposium on the issue for the Asian region .
On Tuesday five private international organizations plan to announce the formation of a coalition to fight for an international prohibition against recruiting anyone under 18 .
The groups involved are Amnesty International , Human Rights Watch , the Jesuit Refugee Service , the Quaker United Nations Office in Geneva , Swedish Save the Children -LRB- on behalf of the International Save the Children Alliance -RRB- , and Terre des Hommes , a European -based network of children 's aid organizations .
In Monday 's debate , speaker after speaker took the opportunity of an open session not limited to the 15 council members to raise larger social issues not often aired in the chamber .
Representatives of a wide range of countries spoke of what they saw as a breakdown in community values .
A Russian deputy representative , Alexander Myevskiy , drew attention to the prevalence of guns among children everywhere .
`` A whole generation is growing up who do not know about a school , a book or children 's toys , '' he said , `` but who are very sophisticated about modern weapons . ''
Bill Richardson , the U.S. representative at the United Nations , said that as civil wars increased , `` international standards and principles are being swept aside , civilian populations are often deliberately targeted and children suffer disproportionately . ''
Otunnu told the council about the tribal ethical code of warfare , lapir , that he had learned as a child among the Acholi people of northern Uganda , who believed that honor in battle meant never harming civilians or their food supplies and livelihoods .
He contrasted that with the behavior of armies today .
`` The moral center is no longer holding , '' he said .
`` In so many conflicts today , anything goes .
Children , women , the elderly , granary stores , crops , livestock -- all are fair game in the single-minded struggle for power . ''
