The New York Times said in an editorial on Sunday , July 5 : Last month guerrilla soldiers kidnapped 19 grade-school children from the northern Uganda city of Gulu to join the Lord 's Resistance Army .
Most have since escaped .
But the army , which is waging a campaign against Uganda with the backing of Sudan , has already abducted more than 8,000 children to use as soldiers , most under 16 .
Children who have escaped say they were forced to torture and kill one another .
Once psychologically broken , they are used as sex slaves for other soldiers or become vicious fighters themselves .
These children are part of what researchers now estimate to be 300,000 child soldiers in militaries and guerrilla armies around the world .
Most are close to 18 , but tens of thousands of them are not yet teen-agers .
The United Nations and a new coalition of private groups are trying to focus attention on the issue of child soldiers and reduce their numbers .
Success will depend on shaming the governments and expatriate communities that raise money and buy weapons for guerrilla movements .
Young people have been used as soldiers throughout history , but recent years have seen a large increase , due to the changing nature of war .
Since the end of the Cold War , conflicts between countries fought by armies have been rare .
Wars today are nationalist , ethnic and religious , fought by warlords who have little interest in the Geneva Conventions and may view even infants as enemies .
According to a 1996 Unicef study , civilians represented 5 percent of war casualties at the beginning of the century , but 90 percent in wars today .
Children are more easily taken as soldiers in these wars , fought in populated areas where the dislocations of combat erode traditional taboos .
Child soldiers are most common today in Afghanistan , Sierra Leone , Sri Lanka , Sudan and Uganda .
The spread of automatic weapons has also helped make children into desirable soldiers .
In the past , weapons were too heavy or complex for children to handle .
But a 10-year -old can use an AK -47 almost as effectively as an adult .
Children , moreover , do not demand payment and are more easily indoctrinated and controlled than adults .
Although the blight is worst in the most lawless and chaotic conflicts , it is possible to save some children .
Breaking the world 's silence can help stigmatize groups that use children in war , some of whom crave international legitimacy .
Last week the U.N. Security Council had its first debate on the issue .
Olara Otunnu , the U.N. special representative on children and armed conflict , has received a pledge from Sri Lanka 's major Tamil guerrilla group , one of the most egregious offenders , to stop using children and to set up ways to monitor its compliance with that promise .
Enforcing such pledges depends on the force of public opinion .
The world needs a clear international statement that child soldiers are unacceptable .
A proposed protocol to the 1989 U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child would raise the minimum acceptable age to 18 , from 15 .
Consensus on this issue is important because in areas of poor record-keeping , armies often lie about children 's ages .
A 12-year -old can be passed off as 15 , but 18 is more difficult .
The United States is working against raising the age , for the shortsighted reason that 17-year -olds can legally join the American armed forces .
They represent a tiny percentage of the military , however .
Delegates in Rome negotiating rules for an international criminal court should classify the recruitment of children under 15 as a war crime .
Nations should increase their efforts to curb the illicit trade in firearms .
Finally , more money must go to programs that provide psychological and physical treatment for former child soldiers .
The new spotlight on the horrors of turning children into warriors is a good start .
