FREETOWN , Sierra Leone --
Abibu Hawad is 10 years old , and in the past year he has cut off the hands of more people than he can remember .
But he remembers the first time .
It was soon after he was abducted .
Abibu was living with his grandmother in Freetown , the capital of Sierra Leone , in January when rebels in his country 's brutal civil war stormed the city .
He was in a marketplace , and he and his grandmother became separated in the panic .
He ran , but the rebels caught him as they had so many children before .
Now he was theirs ; soon he would become one of them .
`` I was asked to kill people and perform other atrocities , '' he said recently .
`` I refused , but they threatened to kill me , so I did it . ''
Abibu is no more than 4 feet tall , but the rebels issued him an AK -47 -- a Soviet -made assault rifle that weighs nearly 10 pounds and is capable of firing 400 rounds a minute .
He knew that if he put the gun down , he would be killed .
He fired it during attacks on villages as the rebels retreated from Freetown , but he said he does not know if he killed anyone .
The rebels forced Abibu to drink rum and smoke marijuana and then to perform what he called the `` other atrocities '' -- lopping off the hands of civilians with a machete .
The first person whose hand Abibu severed was that of an old woman .
`` She begged me , '' the little boy recalled .
`` I said I had to do it or I would get in trouble . ''
Stories like his are bitterly common in Sierra Leone .
International aid groups estimate that 5,000 to 10,000 children have fought in the civil war , which began in 1991 .
Now , in theory , the war is over .
In July , the elected president , Ahmed Tejan Kabbah , and the chief rebel leader , Foday Sankoh , signed a peace agreement .
But for many of the children , who , like Abibu , were both the victims of vicious crimes and the perpetrators , the war goes on .
Going home and becoming a kid again is no easy task , said Roisin de Burca , a child protection officer with UNICEF , the United Nations Children 's Fund , in Sierra Leone .
Helping these children is difficult .
But UNICEF 's effort is being augmented by some of the $ 1 billion donated to United Nations -related causes by Ted Turner , the Atlanta billionaire and founder of CNN. After Turner said in 1997 that he would donate $ 100 million a year for 10 years to U.N. projects , he created the U.N. Foundation to disburse the money .
In the first round of grants , announced in May 1998 , the foundation said it was giving $ 1.1 million to UNICEF for `` demobilization of child soldiers in Sierra Leone . ''
But when the rebels swept through Freetown in January , killing , looting and burning , foreigners working for UNICEF and other international organizations were evacuated .
UNICEF was unable to begin using the Turner money until March .
Now the grant is being used to provide former child soldiers with interim care , psychological counseling and other support as they try to fit back into their homes and villages .
But can children return to normal , productive lives after they have been abducted and forced to kill and mutilate and after witnessing the deaths of friends and family ?
`` You always have a better chance with the younger ones , '' de Burca said .
`` You can get them back to their families .
You can get them back to schools .
You can get them back to structures .
And you have more time .
The older ones I 'm really worried for . ''
Children who started fighting when the war began are now in their late teens or older .
They have not attended school , they cannot read and they have no way other than looting to support themselves .
But even the younger children -- those who have escaped or been released and who want to change -- face problems .
Their difficulties range from being bullies to harboring fear and rage -- and having families that do not want them back .
Many of the former young soldiers have reason for rage .
Ibrahim Massaquoi 's eyes blaze when he remembers the day four years ago when rebels burst into his home in eastern Sierra Leone .
The rebels killed Ibrahim 's father in front of him , his mother , his three sisters and five brothers .
`` They cut his throat with a knife , '' Ibrahim said .
`` I was 11 years old . ''
He thinks the soldier who did it was 9 .
Two years later , when Ibrahim was 13 and disgusted that he could not attend school in the rebel-held area where he lived , he decided the time to fight had come .
He joined the Kamajohs , a tribal group with secret initiation rites that members believe render them immune even from bullets .
Ibrahim took a bullet in his right foot , but he did not die -- and so he believes .
The Kamajohs and similar groups formed fighting forces that supported the government and fought to protect villages from rebel attacks .
`` We killed , but it was in battle , '' Ibrahim said .
Now 15 , Ibrahim is trying to set aside his anger .
But the rage still shows .
He attends St. Andrew 's Secondary School in the city of Bo with 35 other former child soldiers from both sides of the conflict .
The school receives Turner money from UNICEF , through the Council of Churches of Sierra Leone , to support its work to help former child combatants .
There have been no problems between former fighters from different factions and no hostility shown by students who were never soldiers , according to the principal , the Rev. S.M. Bayoh .
`` We spoke to them , and they are brothers and sisters , '' Bayoh said , noting that the school may accept 100 more former child soldiers .
The degree to which Turner 's money helps this generation of Sierra Leonean youths lead peaceful lives will take years to determine .
UNICEF officials are trying to use the money effectively .
De Burca is working to have a Sierra Leonean organization involved in each program because international workers evacuate when fighting flares .
`` The first shot in the air , you 'll be gone , '' she said .
`` The program will stop , and we ca n't have that . ''
She wants the other groups , sometimes international organizations paired with local groups , to contribute to the programs , increasing resources available to the children .
The agencies that get UNICEF grants work with local organizations such as schools , interim care centers and skills workshops .
Whenever possible , de Burca urges the groups receiving the grants to give the local groups materials instead of money , which is harder to monitor .
A woodworking training center , for instance , might get lumber and tools rather than cash .
Although inability to pay school fees prevents many children from attending school , UNICEF tries not to give the former soldiers money .
That , de Burca said , would reward the former combatants .
Instead , the money is given to schools , such as St. Andrew 's , which then waive the fees .
To demobilize the child soldiers , UNICEF has established emergency care programs at four sites around the country .
Children who escape or have been released are given intensive psychological counseling individually .
These are children who have considered possibilities that no child should have to envision .
De Burca noticed writing on the shoes of a 12-year -old boy and asked to see it .
On the shoes , the boy had written his name , his parents ' names and the name of his village .
`` In case they killed me , '' he explained , `` I hoped somebody would find me and tell my mother and father . ''
At the interim care facilities , the youngsters are told their families will be traced .
Then they are dispersed to programs in their home areas .
It will be four or five months before officials can tell whether the Turner grant has helped children resume life in their villages , de Burca said .
`` But for demobilization , the money is making a difference , '' she said .
`` At any time of the day or night , soldiers can be cared for . ''
Reintegration , though , can be difficult for children who have pillaged and maimed .
Aiah Bockarie , 16 , feels so bad about what he 's done that it makes him sick .
The first time he was ordered to sever someone 's hand , he refused ; for that he was cut on the wrist with a bayonet .
He still bears the scar .
After that , he complied .
The first person whose hand he cut off was his uncle .
Other rebels forced the man 's arm onto a slab of cement .
`` My uncle said , ` You are my child !
Why are you cutting off my hand ? ' ''
Aiah recalled .
`` And I replied , ` I have an order to cut off your hand . ' ''
The rebels often forced children to commit crimes in their own villages or against their families , international workers say .
That prevented them from returning home and turned the rebels into the only family they had left .
It was common , too , to deliberately addict child soldiers to drugs .
Aiah said he snorted powdered cocaine and applied crack cocaine to cuts in his skin .
`` I was rough .
I was insane , '' he said .
`` I cannot remember how many hands I cut off , but I cut off many . ''
He said he is off drugs now .
He wants to go to school and become a doctor .
He wants to pray .
And he begs God 's forgiveness .
`` It is not necessary at the age of 16 to continue destruction , '' he said .
He wants to be a doctor , to heal people , but he still has flashbacks about the things he did in the war .
He is staying in Freetown as part of the program Children Associated With the War , run by the Catholic Mission , which gets Turner funding .
He has n't seen his family since he was kidnapped at age 14 .
He has no idea how many survived the war , though he learned his uncle was killed in an ambush the day Aiah cut off his hand .
For all his prayers , Aiah radiates rage .
That 's common , said Peter Francis , acting program manager for Children Associated With the War .
`` They are both the victims of atrocities and the perpetrators , '' Francis said .
`` They always have flashbacks .
They are very violent .
The only difference is they do not have a gun . ''
Yet the center , he said , has had many successes -- children who now are `` responsible people . ''
They get interim care for six months at the most .
Counseling , tracing the child 's family and returning the child home are critical .
`` If you allow the child to just be hanging around the neighborhood , you are creating more trouble , '' Francis said .
But persuading the child 's village to take him back requires negotiation .
Rituals must be performed to appease the gods and atone for atrocities .
The village chief may be presented with a goat , rice or palm oil .
If the chief accepts the child , so does the entire community -- including the family .
As Francis spoke , his boss , the Rev. Theophilus Momoh , returned from a trip to outlying areas of the country .
During that trip , he returned 43 children to their homes .
At first , his mission to bring `` rebel boys '' back was met with resistance .
But some parents were overjoyed .
`` They said they thought their children were dead , '' Momoh said .
`` Some were really happy .
They started singing . ''
Momoh sometimes pays the head of the village a little money as a token of sincerity and as a promise that he will respond if the child creates trouble .
A parent or relative signs an agreement accepting the return of each child and pledges to try to put the child back in school .
Staffers of Children Associated With the War make follow-up visits to assess the family 's capacity to care for the child .
Not all former combatants are boys .
Aminata Turay was 15 when rebels came into Koidu in Sierra Leone 's diamond-rich eastern region .
Her father ordered the family inside , but the rebels threatened to burn down the house unless he opened the door .
`` The rebels entered the house and lined up my father , my mother , myself , my younger brother and my two younger sisters , '' said Aminata , now 16 .
`` They took me and my brother out of the line and told my father that they were taking us away with them .
My parents fell on the floor , weeping and begging them not to take us away .
They fired several shots on the ground in front of my parents and threatened to kill them .
So they took us away . ''
She lost track of her brother and was forced to march as the rebels fought their way through village after village on the way to Freetown .
She did not kill , she said , but she helped burn houses .
`` The rebel soldier who abducted me had made me his wife , '' she said .
`` He was forcing me to have sex with him at gunpoint . ''
She escaped when the rebels were routed from Freetown .
She does not know if her family is alive or dead .
Mariama Jalloh 's family survived , but getting her relatives to take her back was difficult .
She was kidnapped when she was 17 .
The first time a rebel tried to rape her , she resisted .
`` That 's exactly why we abducted you , '' the rebel told her , `` so you could provide these services to me . ''
He threatened to kill her if she resisted .
She had seen another girl her age who had fought her rape vigorously .
Rebels beat her and branded `` RUF , '' for Revolutionary United Front , on her chest .
Then she was killed by a boy , perhaps 11 , himself a kidnap victim .
So Mariama submitted .
She was raped `` every day , '' she said softly , shaking her head .
`` Every day .
Every day . ''
She cried when she found out she was pregnant .
She tried traditional remedies , eating herbs and leaves , to terminate the pregnancy , but they did n't work .
Ill and depressed , she had to march with the rebels as they burned their way toward Freetown .
Those who lagged were shot .
After she escaped , she found that the rebels had burned her father 's house .
He had lost everything .
And here came his daughter , pregnant with a rebel baby .
He wanted nothing to do with her .
Mariama worked intensively with a counselor whose fees were paid with Turner money .
`` She kept telling me there was life after that , '' Mariama said .
`` It 's not the end of the world , and the important thing is to have the baby . ''
The baby is 5 months old now .
Mariama named her Olayinka Maude Jalloh , after her therapist .
Her father still wants nothing to do with her .
But , following family mediation , Mariama is living with an aunt and uncle .
Her mother is caring for the baby .
Mariama is back in the school she attended before her capture .
And she says she 's going to be all right .
Abibu Hawad , the 10-year -old who cut off more hands than he can remember , is back living with his grandmother .
His first-grade teacher , Zainab Hassan , said the boy has shown no behavioral problems and that she has made him prefect of the class .
Still , neighborhood kids `` provoke '' him , Abibu said , and call him a rebel child .
And he feels guilt .
`` Any time I see an amputee , inside me I say to myself , ` We are the ones who did that , ' '' he said .
Sometimes in his dreams the bad guys come back , tromp down his stairs and issue him a gun .
But the worst fears come when he is awake .
Recently , news of skirmishes between rebel factions in the northern part of the country reached Freetown .
`` I was worried that they would come and make me fight again , '' Abibu said .
`` I thought I was going to be forced into another war . ''
