WASHINGTON --
When he entered the private investigation business nearly 20 years ago , James J. Rapp opened a company to do surveillance and other things that he did not want to talk about , particularly because its name , Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap , aptly described its operations .
Now Rapp , a 39-year -old investigator who used to promise on his Web page that he could quickly get anyone 's private telephone records or bank account balances for as little as $ 100 , is in the middle of legislative , regulatory and criminal battles over how much privacy millions of Americans should enjoy when they go to the bank or make a phone call .
Rapp has made a career of posing as the person whose records he is trying to uncover , to trick banks , telephone companies and other institutions into revealing confidential information sought by his clients .
The practice is known in the trade as pretexting , and it has drawn a lawsuit from the Federal Trade Commission that names Rapp , his wife , Regana , and their company , Touch Tone Information Inc .
A trial date has not been set , although Touch Tone has agreed to honor a preliminary injunction barring the investigative practices that are at issue in the suit .
The lawsuit is billed by both sides as a landmark case , and Rapp is receiving significant support from a coalition of information brokers and debt collectors who see the government 's action as a potential threat to their livelihood .
But even some of his allies are uneasy about using Rapp as the vehicle to avoid new and tougher government privacy rules , because he has a criminal record and served a four-year prison sentence for theft .
The case against Rapp has also been discussed in Congress as lawmakers in both the House and Senate , with the support of the Clinton administration , are trying to make such investigative techniques a federal crime and impose new civil liabilities on practitioners of the art of deceiving banks .
He is being investigated by a grand jury in Colorado under a new state law that makes it a crime to use deceptive practices to obtain private information .
In a separate lawsuit filed in 1996 , he was alleged to have helped a client , the International Beverage Corp. , obtain telephone records of a competitor , Saybrex International , from AT&T as part of an effort by International Beverage to learn who Saybrex 's customers were .
Saybrex , a family-run liquor exporter in Beverly Hills , Calif. , ultimately successfully sued the competitor -- though not Rapp , who was not named as a defendant in the suit .
Saybrex , however , was unable to force AT&T to tighten its procedures for handing out customer records .
In a recent series of interviews , Rapp and his lawyers said there was nothing inherently wrong with using trickery to get confidential information , particularly since that information is often not otherwise obtainable .
They also said that Rapp had cracked many cases in which deception was the only way to find money for victims of crimes and neglect , like abandoned spouses and children , and for plaintiffs in lawsuits who were unable to collect judgments , and for insurance companies and banks that had been defrauded .
`` The message that the government is sending in its case is that if you 're a deadbeat dad , you do n't have to worry any more , '' Rapp said .
`` After all , how else are you going to get at this information ? ''
Rapp has his defenders , and is even cited as an exemplar by an industry group of investigators and debt collectors who so far have been moderately successful in watering down proposed legislation and obtaining significant loopholes for certain kinds of cases , such as tracking down assets for child support payments .
The group , the Coalition to Amend the Financial Information Privacy Act , is paying for Rapp 's legal defense in the FTC case -- and using him to help raise money for its lobbying efforts .
The coalition 's members maintain that the practice of pretexting is no different from what police officers or some journalists do when they go undercover or assume false identities in the course of doing their jobs .
Critics of the information brokers say that publicly available data bases and computer services offer a variety of information about people and their finances , including their Social Security numbers , the prices they paid for their homes and any existing liens .
They note that other information , like bank deposits , can be obtained when necessary through a court subpoena .
But Rapp and his supporters say that information like bank and telephone records is generally not publicly available , that it can change quickly during the time it takes to get a judge 's order , and that the only way money can be recovered in many instances is by duping a financial institution .
`` What our clients are trying to do is even the odds , '' said Stephen C. Leckar , a lawyer at the Washington firm Butera & Andrews , which is representing both the coalition and Rapp .
`` If some people do n't pay their bills , investigators like Rapp are just leveling the playing field . ''
But the FTC sees it as privacy issue .
`` Touch Tone 's pretexting is a particularly pernicious invasion of consumers ' privacy -- using deception to gain access to sensitive , private financial information , '' Robert Pitofsky , the FTC 's chairman , said .
`` This case should send a strong message to information brokers that the FTC will pursue firms that use false pretenses at the expense of consumers ' privacy and also create opportunities for economic injury to consumers . ''
The banking industry is caught in the middle .
On the one hand , it has publicly denounced the deceptive techniques and called for some new legislation , although it has also tried to make sure that any new laws do not create new liabilities for the banks that might be too quick about turning over confidential information .
On the other hand , many of the clients of investigators like Rapp have been banks seeking to collect delinquent loans .
`` There 's little question that some banks will hire information brokers , '' said John Byrne , a senior counsel at the American Bankers Association and an expert on privacy issues .
`` We have tried to emphasize that banks should ask questions about how they are getting information and that there are legitimate means of getting at the same stuff . ''
Court papers in both the Saybrex and FTC lawsuits describe Rapp and his employees as using fake telephone numbers and phony corporations to deceive banks or telephone companies into turning over confidential information .
In the FTC case , transcripts of calls to banks that were recorded as part of the government 's surveillance revealed Touch Tone employees pretending to be doddering customers in order to obtain Social Security numbers and other information , like the maiden name of an account holder 's mother .
In some cases , bank representatives declined to help .
But in others , they guided the Touch Tone employee to the correct answer and even supplied information like account balances .
-LRB- BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- Private investigators familiar with the deceptive practices of information brokers say another common technique is the `` Trojan check . ''
The broker sets up a dummy corporation and sends a check for a small amount of money to the target of the investigation either as a supposed rebate or award .
When the target deposits or cashes the check , information about the target 's bank account is imprinted on the canceled check .
The broker can then use that information to approach the bank .
The legislation and legal fights come as Washington has become captivated by privacy issues and the rights of consumers and the businesses that hold their confidential records , from insurance companies and hospitals to banks and telephone companies .
Late last week , the House Commerce Committee inserted a variety of consumer privacy protections into the latest version of legislation to overhaul the nation 's banking system .
Those proposals , which were endorsed by consumer groups and include a new right to sue companies that violate their customers ' privacy rights , threatens to undermine broad industry support for the legislation .
Experts say it is not clear whether the broadly worded existing federal fraud laws would permit the criminal prosecution of a person who deceives an institution to gain access to private information , which is why Congress may act this year to make the law more explicit .
-LRB- END OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- On the Web pages and court papers of the coalition supporting Rapp , he is portrayed as a victim of an overzealous federal agency , an agency that if it prevails will make it more difficult for abandoned wives and their children to find desperately needed assets of their deadbeat dads .
But even as Rapp has become the industry 's poster boy for what the coalition has called a `` witch hunt '' by federal regulators , it turns out that he has had his own more serious difficulties with the law .
Rapp served four years in prison in the 1970s and ' 80s in Colorado for theft , which was a violation of his probation on an earlier conviction for auto theft .
State records in Denver show that in 1992 he pleaded guilty to impersonating a peace officer .
He and his wife have had more than $ 38,000 in tax liens imposed by the federal government for failing to pay taxes .
The industry 's using him as their symbol `` is like bankers embracing Jesse James , '' said Marshall B. Grossman , a Los Angeles lawyer who represents Saybrex .
Because he is a man who has made a career out of deception , it can be difficult to sort through the substance of many of Rapp 's claims .
-LRB- BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- He said in an interview that the investigations and the poor health of his parents had driven him out of business in recent weeks , a business that he said had annual revenue of about $ 1 million for the last few years .
He said there was nothing wrong with employing deception to get at private information and that his clients over the years had included banks , tabloid newspapers and television programs .
He asserted that he had probably trained half of the nation 's information brokers , had solved `` over 100 cases a day '' and that he worked for private investigators hired to get information for news organizations about the families of the victims of the Columbine High School shootings in Littleton , Colo .
He also said he had done work for agents at two field offices of the FBI , but he refused to provide any references or say anything more about the work .
Many of his assertions could not be verified .
He also asserted that he had received an `` associate 's degree '' in criminal justice from Metropolitan State College in Denver .
But Carrie Schafer , the communications director for the college , said school records showed that Rapp had attended the school but did not complete enough courses to earn a degree .
-LRB- END OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- And while Rapp has had no qualms about using trickery to obtain confidential information on behalf of his clients , he so values his own privacy that he was hesitant to be photographed for this article .
`` We live way out in the county and no mail comes here , '' he said .
`` Everything is quiet .
That 's the way I like it .
Nice and quiet and easy . ''
NYT -06-13-99 1653EDT
