In a move likely to fuel debate over how secondary schools should handle the issue of homosexuality , a coalition of medical , mental health , educational and religious organizations announced Monday that it would send the United States ' school superintendents a booklet informing them that there is `` no support among health and mental health professional organizations '' for the idea that homosexuality is abnormal or mentally unhealthy .
The Just the Facts Coalition , representing the American Academy of Pediatrics , the National Education Association , the American Psychological Association and seven other groups , said the 12-page booklet would be mailed Tuesday to the heads of all 14,700 public school districts in the nation .
The coalition said the booklet `` provides information that will help school administrators and educators to create safe and healthy environments in which all students can achieve to the best of their ability . ''
The publication also expresses concerns about the potential harm to gay students posed by `` reparative therapy '' and other techniques intended to change sexual orientation .
`` I think this is a history-changing moment , '' said Kevin Jennings , executive director of the Gay , Lesbian and Straight Education Network , a New York organization devoted to ending anti-gay bias in the schools .
`` The entire mainstream education and mental health establishment has said that it is n't lesbian , gay and bisexual students who need to change , it is the conditions in our schools that need to change . ''
But conservative groups attacked the booklet , saying that it was based on politics , not science .
`` They 're saying they want to present factual information on homosexuality , but we believe that they 're presenting propaganda , '' said John Paulk , a homosexuality and gender analyst for Focus on the Family , a Colorado Christian group that holds Love Won Out conferences where reparative therapy is endorsed and participants are taught how to combat `` pro-gay '' messages they believe children are receiving in public schools .
Janet Parshall , chief spokeswoman for the conservative Family Research Council , also condemned the coalition 's mailing .
`` If they 're going to talk about ` the facts , ' here 's a fact : All the major religions of the world consider homosexuality wrong , '' she said .
Deanna Duby of the National Education Association , a leading union of schoolteachers , said the coalition was formed after members heard about the Love Won Out conferences and decided a response was needed .
Ms. Duby , who helped create the booklet , said the publication was approved by the education association 's leadership , including its president , Bob Chase .
Most of the organizations represented by the coalition , Ms. Duby said , had already passed resolutions on their own condemning reparative therapy and endorsing the need for `` safe environments '' for gay students .
`` Nothing in the document conflicted with any of our policies , and in fact it was very much in keeping with the policies of our organization , '' she said .
The booklet , `` Just the Facts About Sexual Orientation & Youth , '' is divided into short chapters , including sections on how sexual orientation develops ; reparative therapy , `` transformational ministries '' and other religion -based efforts that try to help homosexuals change their sexual orientation ; and laws protecting gay men and lesbians from discrimination .
`` Because of the religious nature of ` transformational ministry , ' '' the booklet advises , `` endorsement or promotion of such ministry by officials or employees of a public school district in a school-related context could raise constitutional problems . ''
The publication states that `` therapy directed specifically at changing sexual orientation is contraindicated , since it can provoke guilt and anxiety while having little or no potential for achieving changes in orientation . ''
Five of the organizations in the coalition contributed money to print and distribute the booklet , as did Michael Dively , a philanthropist and former member of the Michigan Legislature who is gay .
Responding to the booklet , Paulk , of Focus on the Family , said that no scientific studies had been done on reparative therapy , and that organizations that have `` debunked '' the technique were acting on the basis of political motives , not scientific evidence .
Paulk also defended his organization 's efforts to promote in schools the conservative view of homosexuality as abnormal .
`` Parents do n't want their children being taught about homosexuality , period , '' Paulk said .
`` We believe that homosexuality is something that should be talked about in the home .
But in the worst-case scenario , if it 's going to be presented in public schools , we want equal time . ''
But Bruce Hunter , director of public affairs for the American Association of School Administrators , which represents public school superintendents and is a member of the coalition , said his organization agreed with the message of the booklet .
Still , he said , the publication is likely to be used by school administrators `` based on community values . ''
`` There are many communities in this country that are just too conservative for that , and I trust superintendents to know their communities , '' Hunter said .
`` On the other hand , when push comes to shove , occasionally you have to stand up , and we would hope they would stand up for tolerance . ''
Other members of the coalition that endorsed the booklet are the American Federation of Teachers , the National Association of Social Workers , the National Association of School Psychologists and the Interfaith Alliance Foundation .
Copies of the booklet can be obtained by a call to any of the organizations that are participating in the effort , a spokesman said .
