GENEVA --
The United States , which wants to keep the option of sending soldiers into combat at 17 , found itself with few allies in negotiations this week on an international agreement to set a new minimum age for recruitment and active military service .
American officials insisted that any global pact allow volunteers younger than 18 to fight for their country .
Currently , 17-year -olds can volunteer , with parental consent , for active service in the United States .
Britain recruits volunteers at 16 and sends them into active duty .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">This practice has been denounced by human rights campaigners who are seeking to raise the current minimum , from 15 , as spelled out in the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child , to 18 , as the surest way to reduce the number of child soldiers in the world .</ENAMEX>
Experts estimate that 300,000 child combatants are involved in 30 conflicts , including fighting in Mexico , elsewhere in Latin America , Africa and Chechnya .
Human rights groups say most are recruited or pressed into hostilities by , or on behalf of , governments .
Some 35 countries spoke out in support of a ban on soldiers under 18 .
The U.S. position was backed by Britain , Egypt , Kuwait and Singapore .
Dozens of countries recruit people younger than 18 , although many do not send soldiers into combat until they reach 18 .
This is the second time recently that the American position on youths under 18 has encountered international opposition .
At American insistence , the text of an International Labor Organization treaty negotiated last year that is intended to end exploiting children does not prohibit those under 18 from voluntarily enlisting in the military .
A number of other countries , along with unions , supported a minimum of 18 .
U.S. officials , in a suggested compromise on the rights-of-the-child treaty , proposed a flat ban on soldiers younger than 18 for rebel armies .
That would allow governments to continue to recruit and deploy minors .
`` It 's not a question of whether the age is 15 or 18 , '' Michael Southwick , the State Department official who led the U.S. delegation here , said in an interview .
`` The real problem is the 9- and 10-year -olds in places like Northern Uganda , '' where a rebel movement is fighting the government .
`` There should be no forced recruitment under age 18 .
The problem here is that there are differences between the ages for recruitment and deployment .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">We believe there is nothing wrong with volunteering at age 17 , and deployment is part of that volunteering . ''
Jo Becker , of the Human Rights Watch and head of the Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers , opposes allowing any exceptions to a blanket ban on child soldiers .</ENAMEX>
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">`` What possible justification can there be to make an exception for sending children into combat ? ''</ENAMEX>
Ms. Becker asked .
Southwick said that 40,000 of the 200,000 American soldiers recruited annually were 17-year-olds .
In six months of training , many turn 18 , leaving 2,000 such soldiers on active duty , he said .
He argued that the tradition of 17-year -old volunteers `` was preferable to forced recruitment at 18 . ''
`` We reject the assertion that support for 18 should be a litmus test for whether a country cares about the fate of its children , '' Southwick told delegates from some 50 countries assembled for the negotiations , which have been proceeding for five years .
The advocates of the higher age limit hope to finalize the accord next week .
