ATLANTA --
Earlier this year , Isha Sillah woke to the sound of gunfire and soldiers ransacking her family 's home in Freetown , Sierra Leone .
They raped her and then tried to force the 17-year -old to join their rebellion .
Sillah knew what that meant .
The rebel leaders would carve the initials RUF on her chest to brand her as a member of the Revolutionary United Front .
She would be ordered to kill , maim and terrorize like the other children she had seen with the soldiers .
They might even make her one of their sex slaves .
Sillah was able to escape through a refugee program .
She eventually made her way to the office of Rep. John Lewis -LRB- D - Ga . -RRB-
in Washington .
After hearing her story and the stories of other refugees from torn countries , Lewis and a bipartisan group of lawmakers decided to take action .
On Wednesday , they called on President Clinton to sign a United Nations protocol banning children younger than 18 in combat .
Now , voluntary recruits are allowed at age 15 .
`` We are morally bound to use our strength to protect those who are weak , exposed and vulnerable , '' Lewis said .
`` We have a special and moral obligation to the children on this little planet . ''
These children are being asked to `` kill at one moment and used as cannon fodder the next , '' he said .
And after fighting in wars , these children are left to cope with the trauma of war with little or no psychological help .
`` These are children who should be packing the front rows of elementary schools , instead of filling the front lines of the battlefield , '' Lewis said .
`` We have to find a way to stop it . ''
There are about 300,000 children fighting in conflicts throughout the world , according to several watchdog organizations that monitor the use of children as soldiers .
Most of these children are abducted from their homes or schools and coerced to fight for a cause they know little or nothing about , said Jo Becker , advocacy director of the children 's rights divisions of the Human Rights Watch in New York .
The use of child soldiers is not just an overseas problem , but a problem for U.S. soldiers on peacekeeping missions .
`` Every time U.S. soldiers join a peacekeeping mission abroad in a place like Kosovo or Sierra Leone , chances are they might find themselves face to face with a 13-year -old or a 14-year -old holding an AK -47 , '' Becker said .
`` These children often do n't know what they 're fighting for . ''
In Sierra Leone , there are more than 6,000 children as young as 7 fighting in the war , according to Self - Help Initiative in the Commonwealth , a grass-roots organization based in Maryland that is working for peace in Sierra Leone .
`` The little children , they make them to be like rebels , get them drugs , even young women like me , get them drugged to join them , '' Sillah said .
As she described how the soldiers burst into her family 's home , Sillah 's eyes started to water .
They killed her brother and her grandfather .
`` They get inside my house ... to kill , '' she said .
`` They came into people 's houses killing people , they killed babies ... -LRB- cut -RRB- women 's breasts , all kinds of things , they do it . ''
The United Nations General Assembly adopted the protocol May 25 .
For the new protocol to become international law , 10 countries must sign and ratify the treaty .
In addition to raising the minimum age of soldiers , the treaty would require governments to rehabilitate children who have been traumatized by war .
Lewis , Reps .
Tom Lantos -LRB- D - Calif . -RRB-
and John Porter -LRB- R - Ill . -RRB-
plan to introduce a resolution on the House floor requesting Clinton to sign the treaty .
Sen. Paul Wellstone -LRB- D - Minn . -RRB-
plans to attach a similar resolution to the Defense Authorization Act this week .
If Clinton signs the treaty , the motion will return to the Senate for ratification .
`` This is a humanitarian crisis that must be addressed now , '' Wellstone said .
`` The trauma and abuse that child soldiers face crushes their potential to be productive , self-sufficient citizens . ''
