KATHMANDU , May 18 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The first-ever conference in Asia and the Pacific on child soldiers ended here Thursday with an urgent appeal to armed groups and government forces in the region to stop using children under 18 in wars and conflicts .
Speaking at the end of the conference , Jo Becker , chairwoman of the conference , said the plight of child soldiers in Asia has failed to receive the attention from governments , non-governmental organizations -LRB- NGO and the media in the region .
`` The biggest achievement of this conference is that it has created a regional network on this issue that will now work to reverse this neglect , '' she said .
In the Kathmandu Declaration on the Use of Children as Soldiers adopted by the conference , the about 200 delegates called upon governments and NGOs both inside and outside the Asia - Pacific region to take measures to stop using children in wars and armed conflicts .
They urged governments to use their influence to restrict supply of small arms , including lightweight weapons , which most children can handle with ease , to areas where children are involved in conflicts .
This should include the sanctioning of suppliers , they argued .
Condemning the use of children as soldiers by armed groups , the declaration urged these groups to end the recruitment of children and release children soldiers into safety .
It also asked states to ratify the new Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child , which prohibits the involvement of children under 18 in armed conflicts , and to implement it in national laws .
The delegates also appealed for the UNICEF -LRB- United Nations Children 's Fund -RRB- and other international organizations to help provide alternative resources to children , especially those in marginalized areas , as '' poor and socially deprived children are the ones most likely to become soldiers . ''
It is estimated that more than 300,000 child soldiers are currently being used in wars and conflicts worldwide .
Asia has 75 , 000 child involved in wars .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The four-day conference was co-organized by the Nepali government and the Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers , which is made up of renowned international organizations such as Amnesty International , Defense for Children International , World Vision International and so on .
Participating in the conference were about 200 delegates from 20 Asia - Pacific countries including Australia , Bangladesh , Cambodia , China India , Pakistan , the Philippines , Sri Lanka , Thailand , Japan and about a dozen countries outside the region .</ENAMEX>
