UNITED NATIONS , May 11 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The head of the United Nations Children 's Fund -LRB- UNICEF -RRB- in Sierra Leone has said that the current crisis in the West African country could result in the renewed recruitment of child soldiers , a practice that most military leaders have repeatedly disavowed in the last two years , the UNICEF said here Thursday .
`` We 're very concerned right now about the threat to children , '' said Joanna Van Gerpen , the head of the UNICEF 's office in Sierra Leone , in the nation 's capital Freetown Wednesday .
`` The very high level of instability could lead us back into the vicious cycle where children are used as tools of war , '' she said .
`` This war is the business of adults -- children should n't be forced to pay the price . ''
Leaders of the Sierra Leone Army , the paramilitary Civil Defense Force , and the Armed Forces Ruling Council agreed to disavow the practice of recruiting children as soldiers , she said .
However , although some members of the rebel Revolutionary United Front -LRB- RUF -RRB- have expressed support for the ban on child soldiers , Foday Sankoh , the RUF leader , has not yet gone on record as making this commitment , she said , adding that in Makeni , a town in central Sierra Leone , RUF commanders had re-mobilized at least 40 former child soldiers and had attempted to re-enlist more .
The UNICEF estimates that during Sierra Leone 's nine-year civil war , some 5,000 children -- mostly boys -- were used as combatants .
Thousands of other boys and girls were abducted and forced to become wood gatherers , cooks , sex slaves or porters for the military .
Nearly 1,700 former child combatants had been `` demobilized '' since the signing of the Lome peace accord in July last year and the commencement of the disarmament , demobilization and reintegration program , she said .
The UNICEF provides almost 2 million U.S. dollars each year in financial and technical support to interim care centers where former child soldiers are offered counseling , education , recreation , and skills training opportunities while their families are traced .
`` The lives of hundreds of thousands of children have been affected through constant displacement , disruption of their schooling , exposure to traumatic events , loss of family members , abduction and conscription into the fighting forces and continuous violations of their basic human rights , '' she said .
`` Children in this country have suffered enough . ''
