JERUSALEM , February 10 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The following are major news items in leading Israeli newspapers Thursday .
The Jerusalem Post : -- A part of missing Israel Air Force -LRB- IAF -RRB- navigator Ron Arad 's body was secretly passed to Israel last month , Europe I radio and the Voix Du Nord newspaper report Thursday .
Journalist George Malbrunot , quoting sources in Beirut `` close to the transactions surrounding the search for Arad '' , said that the transfer via German diplomats was linked to the release of five Hezbollah prisoners by Israel on December 26 .
Ha 'aretz : -- Yonatan Yosef , grandson of Shas spirituel assisted by police investigators .
Yosef , 21 , is suspected of being the leader of an extremist right-wing group and of collecting weapons for the organization .
Yosef 's lawyer Naftali Werzberger said the arrest was politically motivated because his grandfather has absolute authority to decide the policies of Shas , the second largest party in the ruling coalition , on the peace talks with Arab countries .
Ma 'ariv : -- With an expected Hezbollah Katyusha reprisal for the IAF attacks on Lebanon over the last two days not forthcoming , some analysts guessed that Syria , who still hopes to reach a peace agreement with Israel , stopped the Hezbollah at the last minute .
Meanwhile , U.S. came down strongly on Israel 's side , saying the Israel Defense Forces -LRB- IDF -RRB- was justified in its attacks on Lebanon .
President Bill Clinton said Wednesday that it is clear that the bombing is a reaction to the deaths of two separate instances of IDF soldiers .
Yediot Aharonot : -- Despite the 1987 recommendations of the Landau commission , Israel 's General Security Service interrogators continued to use excessive force during interrogations and lie about their methods over the next five years , during which time the state comptroller investigated their activities .
The investigation , conducted between 1988 and 1992 under former state comptroller Miriam Ben - Porat , was completed in 1994 but withheld from publication until a Knesset -LRB- Parliament -RRB- Foreign Affairs and Defense subcommittee agreed to release a nine-page condensed version Wednesday .
