BEIJING
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
China expressed concern Tuesday that a U.S. - Japan agreement to research an anti-missile defense system could set off an arms race in Northeast Asia .
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhu Bangzao did not directly criticize the agreement reached at a meeting of U.S. and Japanese foreign and defense ministers Sunday .
But in response to a reporter 's question about it , Zhu warned of the fragile peace surrounding the Korean peninsula .
`` All parties concerned should exercise restraint and refrain from doing anything that may cause tensions in the region and spark a new arms race , '' Zhu said at a routine media briefing .
He added that China opposed any side trying to `` seek military superiority and undermine regional security . ''
Conflict between North Korea and South Korea is seen as the region 's most likely flash point .
In the background is rivalry between Northeast Asia 's big powers -- China , Japan , the United States and to a lesser extent Russia -- who all have influence and interests in the Korean peninsula .
U.S. and Japanese officials described their decision to study a theater missile defense system as a necessary step after North Korea launched a two-stage rocket over Japan on Aug. 31 .
China has grown increasingly wary of U.S. - Japanese defense cooperation , fearing a plot to contain its rise as a regional power .
Beijing has vigorously protested a defense agreement reached last year , despite U.S. and Japanese assurances that it did not target China .
A Japanese official suggested that the pact would require Japan to support U.S. military action if China attacked Taiwan , which Beijing claims as a rebel province .
Northeast Asia 's complex rivalry is also being marked by intensified diplomacy .
Chinese President Jiang Zemin , who held a successful summit with U.S. President Bill Clinton this summer , was to have traveled to Japan and Russia this month but canceled the trip after disastrous flooding struck central and northeastern China .
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhu said timing for rescheduled visits was still being worked out .
Following up on their June summit in Beijing , Jiang recently sent a letter to Clinton assuring him their agreements would be implemented , Zhu said .
He added that would bring both countries closer to their goal of building a strategic partnership .
At the summit , both countries agreed not to target the other with nuclear missiles and to improve exchanges between their militaries .
Gen. Zhang Wannian , China 's most politically powerful general , traveled to Washington last week to work out details on military exchanges .
