For anyone charting the rise of China , it has been a pretty scary couple of years .
In early 1997 , the first reports surfaced that China 's Communist Party leaders had set out to funnel money into Democratic political campaigns to buy influence .
Then there was a stream of reports that Chinese rocket scientists had taken advantage of their American partners in the space-launch business to improve the accuracy of China 's strategic nuclear arsenal .
Most recently , a bipartisan congressional panel concluded in a 700-page classified report that Chinese agents had pilfered an array of sensitive U.S. military technology over the last two decades , including , perhaps , the design secret of one of America 's most sophisticated thermonuclear warheads , the W -88 , which sits atop the Trident II missiles in U.S. submarines .
It all seems to add up to an alarming picture of military modernization , coinciding with steadily expanding defense budgets to finance the purchase of new Russian warplanes , submarines and destroyers .
Is the China threat coming true ?
The question betrays America 's Cold War legacy .
China certainly intends to establish itself as a credible military power , one that can defend its national interests near its shores , whether that means fighting for its share of the oil resources of the South China Sea or asserting its sovereignty over Taiwan -- still separated from the mainland since Chiang Kai - Shek fled there with his army in 1949 .
But there is no evidence that China is seeking to compete with the United States as a global military power as the Soviet Union once did .
Some experts now argue that with the collapse of the Soviet Union , China is turning into America 's foremost rival , arming itself for the day when it can kick the United States out of Asia and then lord it over Japan , Taiwan and the Southeast Asian nations .
These experts cite as evidence of China 's hostility its missile tests and war games near Taiwan in 1995 and 1996 ; in response , U.S. aircraft carriers were dispatched to deliver a pointed message to Beijing that military coercion would not be tolerated .
But others say America should relax about China and resist the Cold War reflex , with every Chinese advance , to grab a shovel to dig that bomb shelter in the backyard .
Former Defense Secretary James Schlesinger , the dean of the Cold Warriors in the 1970s , says : `` China is not going to be a world power in the existing period , and possibly never .
They recognize it , and the last thing they want is to tangle with the United States . ''
Robert Suettinger , until recently the CIA 's senior analyst for Asia and now a visiting fellow at the Brookings Institution , agrees .
The intelligence community consensus on China `` does n't add up to a threat , '' he says .
Still , with the passing of the Cold War , during which China and the United States had common interest in opposing Soviet adventurism in Africa , the Middle East and Asia , there is little today that anchors the U.S. relationship with China .
Hence President Clinton 's difficulty in sustaining a policy of engagement in the face of each new report of dissident arrests , technological espionage and the missile buildup against Taiwan .
Whatever challenge China might pose in the future , it wo n't be anything like the danger once posed by Soviet divisions poised against Europe , by Soviet armadas in every ocean and thousands of Soviet nuclear warheads aimed at America .
While Moscow built a wall around its irrational economy , China has been busy building export markets , opening its economy and expanding personal freedom at home -LRB- up to a point -RRB- .
Having witnessed Japan 's success , China 's leaders believe that in the next century , national power will be measured by economic strength , not military .
Therefore , China is joining world institutions , not threatening them .
Chinese exports are the engine of China 's growth .
They have given Beijing the same stake in peace and stability that every other nation has in the era of globalization .
Schlesinger says the danger of overindulging America 's worst fears about China is that it might actually produce the hostile opponent that some Americans foresee .
Get over it , he says .
To experts like him , China 's gradual military modernization is an inescapable outgrowth of national development .
In this view , the disturbing record of Chinese espionage in the United States proves only that Beijing has been pursuing its own interests much as Taiwan , Egypt , Israel , Russia , France and Brazil all have , at the United States ' expense .
Even that reality may not be so alarming .
The roots of the Chinese espionage go back to the late 1970s , when Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping pressed U.S. officials for technology to help China modernize .
It is now known that he also hedged his bets by ordering China 's spy agency to go after critical technologies through the back door .
Much of the effort , however , was bungled or detected by U.S. intelligence .
And anyway , for all of China 's illicit acquisitions , the Chinese military stubbornly refuses to improve .
John Culver , the CIA 's military expert on China , told a National Defense University forum last year that China 's army `` is still largely the same force it was at the time the USSR collapsed , '' and that `` it is still overwhelmingly a ground army with an inventory of weapons that , in most cases , has been deployed with the same units for up to 30 years . ''
Even with new Russian jet fighters , submarines , destroyers and a whole array of new missiles , Culver argued , the Chinese army has created only a few `` pockets of modernity '' and has failed to alter the military balance with Taiwan .
On average , Chinese pilots fly far fewer training hours than those in any modern air force .
The Chinese navy and air force are facing obsolescence of their Soviet -era warplanes and warships .
