-LRB- Distributed by New York Times Special Features -RRB- Much of our energy at the State Department is spent encouraging foreign governments to act for what we perceive to be the common good -- dissuading regional rivals from provocative acts , promoting economic reform , blocking destabilizing transfers of arms and technologies , urging the release of political prisoners and advocating the development of democratic practices and institutions .
We do this to prevent conflicts , build prosperity and strengthen the forces of freedom .
But to succeed , we must convince foreign leaders that the common good is good for them as well and that our own agenda is aboveboard .
Obviously , we do not use the same approach with an established modern power that we use with a government whose authority is weak and institutions wobbly .
We consider the domestic pressures that may be affecting a government along with the proclivities and capacities of its leaders .
And in any relationship , we refer constantly back to our basic principles and goals .
For example , there has been much debate about whether we are more likely to influence the actions of ornery foreign governments by using the carrot of engagement or the stick of sanctions .
The answer , of course , is that it depends .
Neither China nor Burma is democratic , and both take a dim view of dissent .
Yet we are engaged in a strategic dialogue with China while maintaining far tougher sanctions , including an investment ban , against Burma .
Some accuse us of having a double standard .
In reality , we have a single standard based on our assessment of the approach most likely to achieve results that serve U.S. interests and ideals .
In Burma 's case , a repressive military regime has rebuffed repeated appeals for talks with the democratic opposition led by Nobel Peace Prize -winner Aung San Suu Kyi .
Under the junta , Burma has become , with official connivance , the world 's leading source of heroin and , with official neglect , the epicenter of a regional AIDS crisis .
Many of its increasingly desperate people are fleeing to neighboring countries .
The democrats , who overwhelmingly won Burma 's last free elections , have called for a halt to foreign investment and many categories of aid .
Political change is essential if Burma is to transform itself into a source of stability in Southeast Asia .
Sanctions may well work .
Having driven the economy into the ground , the regime desperately needs foreign investment , loans and aid .
By denying these benefits -- and encouraging others to do the same -- we may eventually persuade Burmese leaders to rethink where their own best interests lie .
America 's stake in China is far deeper and broader than in Burma .
Asian security , nonproliferation and economic health cannot be won without Chinese cooperation .
Our task is to encourage China to become a full and fully constructive participant in the international system .
Our approach is to engage in a dialogue with Chinese leaders while encouraging the broad exchange of information and ideas between American and Chinese citizens .
Unlike Burma , China is changing rapidly .
The government is committed to economic reform .
On proliferation , China has progressed from advocating the spread of nuclear weapons to signing the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty , the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and the Chemical Weapons Convention while agreeing to tighten controls on sensitive exports .
In the political sphere , China has placed a new emphasis on the rule of law , permitted somewhat more open public discussion of political reform , released several prominent dissidents and ratified one international human-rights convention while promising to sign another this fall .
In contrast to Burma , many Chinese reformers welcome Western political and commercial engagement with their government as a spur to further openness and change .
Moreover , the Dalai Lama , among others , has praised the U.S. - China dialogue as an appropriate way to express American support for preserving the cultural , linguistic and ethnic heritage of Tibet .
Critics are right to say that this progress is not good enough .
That is why President Clinton spent much of his time during the Beijing summit working on the hard issues : urging China to do better on nonproliferation and political prisoners , pushing for more open markets , stressing that our improved relations cannot come at Taiwan 's expense and making the case for democracy directly and compellingly to the Chinese people .
It would be presumptuous to suggest that our engagement alone will cause democracy in China to blossom .
China 's future will be determined by the Chinese .
But our engagement can contribute to an environment in which the Chinese people have more access to information , more contact with the democratic world and less resistance from their government to outside influences and ideas .
It is too early to draw definitive conclusions about the success of our policy toward China or Burma .
In both cases , we hope for progress ; in neither do we expect miracles .
Toward these countries and others where we hope for change , we must be patient and persistent .
And we must design our policies not with a cookie cutter but with the special characteristics of each in mind .
All this argues for flexibility .
There has long been tension between the executive branch and Congress over mandated sanctions , prohibitions , restrictions , earmarks and other restraints on foreign policy .
Having worked in both branches , I know that this tension is inevitable and , at times , constructive .
When I meet with foreign officials , referring to pressure from Congress can help to spur action .
What is not helpful is the growing tendency to view entire relationships through the prism of a single issue or to enact laws that deprive the executive of the leverage needed to bargain effectively .
The true challenge of diplomacy does not reside in the beauty of our goals .
Foreign policy is practical , not aesthetic .
It requires persuading others to agree to new policies and actions based on new understandings .
That may entail simple logic , economic incentives , technical assistance , new commitments , information-sharing , coercion , the threat of coercion , sanctions , the threat of sanctions or any combination of the above -- and it may require a different mix of those elements tomorrow than it does today .
To do his job well , the president must be able to pick and choose .
You would not ask a carpenter to build a house with only a hammer .
We should not expect our chief executive to construct a successful foreign policy without a full box of tools .
-LRB- Madeleine K. Albright is the 64th U.S. secretary of state . -RRB-
NEXT : Part III : Five Major Tests of American Leadership --
