BEIJING --
In an atmosphere of crisis , Chinese President Jiang Zemin is fighting on several fronts at once , trying to exert his personal authority in new ways .
Faced with an exceedingly difficult political challenge from Taiwan , where President Lee Tung -hui seems to be spoiling Beijing 's dream of reunification , Jiang is not retreating , but is rather taking the offensive .
At the same time that he threatens force against Taiwan , Jiang is conducting twin political campaigns : one against Falun Gong , the spiritual movement that was outlawed last month , and the other against laxness in the Communist Party apparatus .
Friday , state media reported a major policy address by Jiang , his first since the leadership emerged from an annual summer conclave at the seaside resort of Beidaihe .
Jiang spoke not about Taiwan or Falun Gong , or even about Communist Party discipline .
Instead , he ventured into a fourth area where he would like to make a personal imprint : economic reform , in which he is exerting greater influence .
Why juggle so many balls in the air at one time ?
With the Taiwan issue virtually unsolvable , political experts here say , Jiang is taking the offensive in other areas to extend and strengthen his authority in case Taiwan does not turn out well .
`` Oct .
1 is the key date , '' a political analyst in Beijing said , referring to the 50th anniversary of Communist Party rule , an occasion for an enormous political pageant .
`` Jiang is reacting to events , but he is also asserting himself in a way that makes him the unquestioned leader at an important time . ''
Each year , when China 's leaders conclude their highly secretive summer conclave , experts look for clues to what was decided , and characteristically come up with little .
While many guess at whether moderates or conservatives scored more points , all appearances this year point to a stronger hand for Jiang , who likes to portray himself as being simultaneously in the middle and above it all .
On Monday , political experts in Beijing were surprised by a headline that streamed across the top of the People 's Daily , the Communist Party 's mouthpiece : `` Mao Zedong , Deng Xiaoping and Jiang Zemin Discuss Materialism and Atheism . ''
That might sound like so much Communist Party drivel to an outsider , but party historians doubtless noted the milestone .
It was the first time that the newspaper had placed Jiang on an even stage with Mao and Deng , each considered giants of China 's revolutionary struggle , and the timing of such a grand assertion can hardly be coincidental .
When Deng passed ultimate control of China 's leadership to Jiang in the early 1990s , Jiang chose Taiwan as one of the main issues that would define his leadership .
The goal of reunifying Taiwan with mainland China had been beyond the grasp of Mao and Deng , and this was clearly an issue where Jiang could distinguish himself .
Jiang chose his trusted mentor , the former Shanghai Mayor Wang Daohan , to open negotiations with Taiwan .
Wang , a flexible and creative politician , began talks with a Taiwan counterpart in 1993 .
Yet Taiwan has proved more difficult than Jiang seemed to expect .
Lee rebuffed repeated attempts to give the talks substance , and then shocked Beijing in July this year by asserting that Taiwan would now see China in a `` special state-to-state relationship , '' discarding the earlier framework that saw the two as part of one conceptual nation .
Seeing Lee 's move as a possibly irreparable step away from reunification , Jiang now faces an excruciating dilemma .
Acquiescing to Lee 's action opens Jiang to attack from hawkish critics that he is losing Taiwan .
Yet taking military action risks the great humiliation that would come from an effective counterattack by Taiwan 's forces , and from drawing U.S. forces to Taiwan 's defense .
A major element of Jiang 's leadership has been to bring China into closer cooperation with the United States , China 's biggest trading partner .
That stance could be ruined by a conflict with Taiwan .
Chinese officials recently warned Washington that they may be forced to `` punish '' Taiwan with some kind of military strike , a message that China 's media have been trumpeting for a month , apparently in the hope that Washington would be able to force Lee to retract his stance .
Yet Lee shows no sign of retreating .
Jiang may try to muddle through a middle ground , making a limited military move that satisfies China 's hawks , without causing the disruption that would come from an all-out war .
Yet on such a delicate issue , mixing the potentially explosive matters of sovereignty and military might , the situation is highly unpredictable .
Another plank of Jiang 's leadership is economic growth , which many experts believe is crucial to maintaining the acceptance of Communist Party rule by restive workers in urban areas , where unemployment is growing fast .
Economic growth could also be severely damaged by any military action .
In Friday 's policy address , Jiang seemed to try to steer a middle course , stressing the need for economic growth while being vigilant on military issues .
`` Competitiveness in our overall national strength is increasingly a decisive factor in shaping a country 's fate , '' Jiang said .
`` We are on the verge of a new and rare opportunity , but at the same time we face grave new challenges .
`` Only by unceasingly enhancing our economic strength , defensive strength and national cohesiveness can we establish an unbeatable position in international competition that grows more intense each day , and effectively protect our national sovereignty and national dignity . ''
Until recently , Prime Minister Zhu Rongji was seen to be in charge of China 's economic reform program .
Yet Zhu 's position appears to have been weakened after his trip in April to the United States , where he was accused by conservative rivals of having offered too many concessions to try to win China 's entry into the World Trade Organization .
On Thursday , appearing at an international horticultural exhibition in Kunming , in China 's southwest , Zhu denied reports that he might resign .
Yet while other leaders met at Beidaihe , he was pictured prominently in the media as he inspected flood waters in central China .
Zhu was also conspicuously absent from the stage in northeast China where Jiang delivered his policy address on economic reform , where several other leading officials did appear .
Instead , Zhu was pictured in Friday 's media at the horticultural exhibition .
Although Zhu does not appear to have been completely sidelined , his authority over economic reform seems to have been curtailed .
That paves the way for a greater hand in economic reform for Jiang .
Some Chinese experts believe that Jiang opened the campaign against Falun Gong 10 days after the Taiwan crisis erupted in order to engage in an easily winnable political movement to draw attention away from a more difficult one .
Yet Jiang appears to have detected in Falun Gong a genuine threat to the Communist Party 's role as the undisputed power in the nation , and also to have seen an opportunity to mobilize the Communist Party apparatus behind him as Falun Gong is stamped out .
Meantime , China 's official bluster about Taiwan continues .
One newspaper , the China Business Times , devoted its front page on Thursday to an analysis of potential military conflict , confidently predicting that Taiwan forces would not be able to withstand an onslaught from the mainland for more than four or five days .
Military experts say , however , that the Chinese army is woefully equipped for an amphibious assault on Taiwan .
That may be why , during the last crisis in 1996 , China lobbed a few missiles into the ocean near Taiwan , talking tough as it took essentially harmless action .
Limited military action is still possible , military experts say , like the seizing of one of the small islands that Taiwan controls , even though they hug the coast of China .
But tough-sounding threats from Beijing have been part of official policy for 50 years , during which China has yet to actually move on Taiwan .
