BEIJING --
`` Who lost Taiwan ? ''
Imagine that the year is 2010 and that this headline is screeching from the People 's Daily .
China 's Communist Party newspaper is pillorying the gang of traitors who allowed the nation 's hallowed patrimony to be severed .
The scenario could go something like this : Hu Jintao , now president , Communist Party chief and chairman of the Central Military Commission , is the main scapegoat .
He is in secret detention and the newspaper is calling for him to be tried for treason , along with several top generals and diplomats .
By 2010 , the People 's Liberation Army was supposed to have been able to take Taiwan by force , if it had come to that .
But then the Taiwanese , fed up with years of threats from Beijing and encouraged by the ever deeper military ties mandated by the U.S. Congress , finally voted to become independent .
And when the moment of truth came , after losing an initial battle in offshore islands to dazzling U.S. technology , ashen-faced Chinese generals concluded that the opposing forces were simply too overwhelming to continue .
So : Who Lost Taiwan ?
The question is n't being asked yet , of course , but imagining a day when it might be must be horrifying for China 's leaders .
For in China 's history-laden politics , almost nothing matters more than the idea that Taiwan will eventually return to the motherland , especially now that Hong Kong and Macau are back in its bosom .
And this emotional truth may help outsiders interpret the White Paper the Chinese leaders issued last week , warning more explicitly than before that Taiwan 's foot-dragging in negotiations , let alone any declaration of independence , could force China to take `` drastic measures . ''
`` There is a growing sense of urgency in Beijing that Taiwan independence will not be the result of a dramatic declaration , but of a gradual drift towards that goal as the island plays for time , '' said Steven M. Goldstein , a political scientist at Smith College .
`` Thus , in a collective leadership it has become imperative not only not to be the leader who lost Taiwan , but not to be the leader who allows this slow drift to continue , '' Goldstein said .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The White Paper was obviously intended to influence Taiwan 's March 18 presidential elections .
Americans have noted how ill-timed it was in other ways -- appearing just as Congress is taking up China 's trade status and a bill to strengthen military ties with Taiwan -- but it responded to some perfectly rational political imperatives in Beijing </ENAMEX>.
And despite its belligerence , the report also contains terms for talks that by China 's lights must seem so generous that they could be rejected only by an evil schemer -- like the current Taiwanese president , Lee Teng -hui , who has outraged the Chinese with his brinkmanship and his assertion of Taiwan 's right to deal with China in a `` state to state relationship , '' implying equal status .
Who knows whether President Jiang Zemin and other leaders really believe it when they say that most `` compatriots '' in Taiwan yearn for reunification , or when they say they are willing to risk a dreadful war ?
But they certainly do n't want to be forced into a conflict that could destroy all they have built on the mainland .
At the same time , with hard-line military officers hovering and their own rhetoric pumping up the people , they cannot watch idly as Taiwan escapes .
So the most important thing is to keep the dream alive .
As long as it survives , so can their careers .
Mao Tse -tung once said that China would wait 100 years to recover Taiwan if it had to , Whiting noted .
Jiang has never set a deadline , in public at least .
Nor does the report , with its warning against `` indefinite '' delays in negotiations .
The day that China feels compelled to box itself in with a concrete deadline may be the day for really serious worry .
Notably , the new report does not even mention Taiwan 's elections or the prospective new presidents .
Rather , it demonizes the outgoing Lee .
By presenting him as the chief culprit , the Chinese are making room for a fresh start -- but also putting the would-be successors on notice that they would repeat Lee 's performance at Taiwan 's peril .
Taiwan 's own domestic politics may not allow much slippage from the brinkman 's position staked out by Lee .
But it is already clear , in the election campaign now under way , that all three candidates are searching for modest areas of common interest .
Finessing language about `` one China '' and `` sovereignty '' will be trickier , especially for the opposition candidate Chen Shui -bian , whose supporters lean more to independence .
Any question can be discussed under the `` one China '' principle , '' the new report said , repeating the offer of better terms than Hong Kong got .
Not only could Taiwan keep its capitalist economy , but `` the central government will not send troops or administrative personnel to be stationed in Taiwan . ''
To Chinese who take reunification for granted , this seems like an incredibly good offer .
But the Taiwanese , reveling in democracy and a prosperous economy , are acutely aware of the implicit assumptions .
`` We are electing a president here , not a governor , '' one official said .
Any negotiations will be plagued by agonizing wordplay and status issues , but Taiwan needs to find creative ways to keep the Chinese talking , it seems clear from last week 's report .
So long as they are talking , they will not be shooting .
And nobody in Beijing will be asking who lost Taiwan .
