BEIJING --
The U.S. national security adviser Sandy Berger completed two days of talks here Thursday that a senior U.S. official described as `` serious and thoughtful , '' aiding the recovery of relations between the United States and China since their nadir last year when NATO warplanes bombed the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The dominant topic in the meetings between Berger and top officials , including President Jiang Zemin , was new tensions between Taiwan and China following China 's threats against the island and the victory of an opposition candidate in Taiwan 's presidential election earlier this month</ENAMEX> .
The United States reaffirmed its support for the `` one China '' policy , the senior official said at a briefing Thursday afternoon , but also stressed the need for peaceful dialogue between Beijing and Taiwan .
Taiwan 's president-elect , Chen Shui -bian , had supported declaring the island 's independence but recently softened his view , saying he would not hold a vote on the issue unless Taiwan came under attack .
Despite earlier warnings of dire consequences if Chen won , Beijing has so far taken a wait-and-see approach .
`` It is our assessment that both sides have been acting prudently , '' the U.S. official said .
He added that the United States hopes the two sides can show `` patience , flexibility and creativity '' in their approach to negotiations .
The official said that China had repeated its warnings that relations with the United States will be seriously damaged if Washington accedes to Taiwan 's request for more advanced defensive weapons .
The official said Clinton will decide on the request in April despite new uncertainties created by Chen 's victory .
Suggesting that new Chinese threats against Taiwan would be counterproductive , Berger also made clear that the U.S. decision on arms sales will be influenced by the level of tensions in the region , the official said .
The Chinese expressed concern about the progress of trade legislation to facilitate China 's entry into the World Trade Organization , while Berger noted `` the clear political reality , '' the official said .
`` To the extent there are tensions in the Taiwan straits , that makes it all the harder to get permanent normal trading status for China through the Congress , '' he said .
