ISTANBUL , Turkey --
President Jiang Zemin of China arrived in Turkey Tuesday for a long-awaited state visit , but hopes that the two countries can build a new alliance were overshadowed by a dispute over ethnic Turks who live in China .
Turkey considers itself the guardian of ethnic Turks around the world , including the 7.2 million Uighurs who live in western China .
Separatist Uighurs have begun a violent campaign against Chinese rule , and scores have been jailed or executed , prompting protests from Turkey .
The Uighurs , who are Muslim and speak a Turkic language , have broad support here .
Uighur nationalists maintain an office in Istanbul , but the Turkish government , wary of provoking China , watches them closely and does not allow Uighurs here to openly protest Chinese rule .
China calls the area where Uighurs live the Xinjiang Autonomous Region , but Turkish politicians and news commentators usually call it Eastern Turkistan .
That phrase suggests that Uighurs belong not to China but to a broad Turkic region whose inhabitants share a culture and a language that has nothing in common with the Chinese .
The Chinese authorities are determined not to give further autonomy to the Uighur region , which is believed to have vast oil and mineral reserves .
They have closed mosques , broken up protests , moved several million Han Chinese into the region and taken other steps that Uighur exiles say are intended to weaken or destroy Uighur identity .
Turkish and Chinese leaders view their countries as natural allies .
Both are rapidly developing nations that hope to play increasingly important roles in world politics over the coming decades .
Both resent foreign criticism of their human rights records , and both have strong military establishments with significant political influence .
Jiang arrived here after a visit to Israel .
China is seeking to buy sophisticated spy planes from Israel , and Israeli leaders have suggested that they will agree to sell them despite objections from the United States .
Turkey has already begun military cooperation with China .
Senior generals visit each other 's headquarters regularly , and cadets train at each other 's military academies .
More military accords may be signed during Jiang 's visit this week .
The prospect of closer military ties and greatly increased trade finally convinced nationalists in the Turkish government to endorse the visit , but they did so grudgingly .
At a state dinner Wednesday , Jiang is to receive a medal that can be awarded only after a unanimous vote of the Cabinet .
Ministers from the far-right Nationalist Action Party , which has strongly endorsed the Uighur cause and condemned Chinese actions in the Uighur region , at first resisted giving their approval but did so at the last minute .
`` We have to pursue realistic policies , '' said Abdulhaluk Cay , the minister in charge of relations with Turkic communities abroad .
`` If giving the medal to the Chinese president is in the interest of Turkey , then we will accept that .
We have accepted it .
But that does not mean that we have changed our mind about Eastern Turkistan .
We will convey our message in a friendly atmosphere during our bilateral meetings . ''
In a speech to a group of writers and performers from eight Turkic nations on Monday , President Suleyman Demirel did not mention the Uighurs directly , but he reiterated Turkey 's support for Turkic peoples .
`` What is important is the sense of being Turkic , '' Demirel said .
`` If there are those who cannot say ` We are Turks ' despite being Turkic , this is nothing less than a denial of their roots .
After all , what is called the ` Turkic world ' stretches from the Adriatic to the Great Wall of China .
Both geography and history show this to be true . ''
The Uighur region lies outside the Great Wall .
