BEIJING , February 27 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- China 's leading newspaper , the `` People 's Daily '' , marks the 49th anniversary of the `` February 28 Uprising '' in Taiwan in a commentary to be published tomorrow .
The commentary describes the uprising as a democratic political movement launched by the people of the island province and a historic event of major influence in Taiwan .
The intensification of contradictions between the people and the authorities in Taiwan at the time cast a shadow on the political life of Taiwan , and these contradictions still exert an influence on the political life of Taiwan today , it says .
Soon after the uprising broke out , the Communist Party of China -LRB- CPC -RRB- fairly described it as `` a justified , legitimate and peaceful movement '' .
The commentary says : `` It was because of Chiang Kai -shek 's intransigence that the movement turned into an armed struggle . ''
And `` the armed struggle in self-defense staged by the Taiwan people was forced upon them .
It is necessary , justified and correct '' , the commentary notes .
The CPC and the Chinese government have always pinned high hopes on the Taiwan people in the unremitting efforts to solve the Taiwan issue and realize the reunification of the motherland , the commentary stresses .
This principle was indicated in the speech made by President Jiang Zemin on the eve of the Spring Festival in 1995 , and in a series of government 's policies , regulations and measures governing the protection of the legal rights and interests of the Taiwan compatriots , it adds .
To put an early end to the state of separation between the two sides of the Taiwan Straits is the popular feeling and the general trend , it says .
However , the commentary states , certain anti- China forces in the world , who are reluctant to see the reunification and prosperity of China , support the splittist forces in Taiwan by various means with the intention of obstructing the development of relations between the two sides of the Taiwan Straits and China 's reunification drive .
Some leaders of the Taiwan authorities collude with the overseas anti- China forces and engage in separatist activities in an attempt to create `` two Chinas '' or `` one China , one Taiwan '' , which have led to unprecedented tension in the cross- Straits relations , directly undermined economic growth and social stability in Taiwan and seriously damaged the immediate interests of the Taiwan people , the commentary says .
