BEIJING , September 4 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Former U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger said here today that the U.S. and China have a common stake in stability and progress in Asia and can work together to make a `` decisive contribution to world order . ''
Speaking at the first conference of the '' 21st Century Forum '' , sponsored by the Chinese People 's Political Consultative Conference National Committee , Kissinger said that `` nations of the world can only benefit from a prospering Asia and an American commitment to its future . ''
He said the central issues before the two governments now are proliferation , human rights , and Taiwan .
With respect to human rights , he said that an `` American administration of either party will be concerned about values shared by most Americans and these will have an influence on their perception of the countries with which we deal , '' but that they `` should resort to diplomacy to end the pressures of sanctions or the threat of sanctions . ''
In the matter of non-proliferation , it is time for a high-level dialogue to give expression to this common interest , instead of dealing with it as a matter of unilateral American legislation , he advised .
On the Taiwan issue , Kissinger said that Chinese leaders have , from 1971 , insisted that Taiwan is a domestic Chinese issue and that they are determined to maintain the territorial integrity of China .
`` They have also informed us that they are patient about final solutions '' and have several times offered negotiations to Taiwan and welcomed negotiations between the Chinese parties , Kissinger said , pointing out that `` six American presidents have affirmed that they recognize only one China and that they will not support a two- China or a one- China , one- Taiwan policy , '' and that the pledges should be honored .
`` If this framework is respected , '' he said , `` it should permit a constructive evolution which enables both sides to work together to create conditions in Asia in which their overriding common interest can be affirmed . ''
He said the world is changing a great deal and that technology is playing an increasingly important role .
`` The world is becoming much more evenly balanced '' and `` the biggest threats to peace are local conflicts rather than great power conflicts , '' he added .
`` Japan is in the process of transforming its political institutions and probably the orientation of its postwar foreign policy , '' while `` India is shifting toward a greater readiness to embrace market economics and a more active foreign policy , '' he said .
`` Some in America , watching China 's rise to industrial strength are calling for a containment policy of China .
This is an illusion '' that will have exactly the opposite effect and `` will have no takers , '' he emphasized .
He said that the Chinese will not accept America 's implying that its cooperation is a special move on a reciprocal basis to be withdrawn at will and used as a form of blackmail .
`` China wants the U.S. as part of its relationships with powerful neighbors and to contribute to China 's growth ; America needs Chinese cooperation , '' he pointed out .
