When asked to comment on the claim that the Taiwan authorities deliberately sidestepped the `` one China '' principle , and the direct exchanges of mail services , trade , air and shipping services in the speech , which aroused widespread repercussions in Taiwan , Hong Kong and Macao , the spokesman said , the `` one China '' principle is the prerequisite and basis for peaceful reunification .
He said the Taiwan authorities did not mention `` one China '' during the recent speech and evaded the fact that Taiwan is part of China 's territory , and instead played tricks with concept of `` popular sovereignty '' in attempt to divide China 's territory .
The spokesman emphasised that the `` promotion of pragmatic diplomacy '' is actually the continuation of Taiwan 's upholding of `` two Chinas '' and `` one China , one Taiwan '' policies .
He said that `` our struggle against splittism and ` independence of Taiwan ' will never stop , so long as the Taiwan authorities does not stop its splittist activities . ''
The spokesman said the direct exchanges of mail , trade , air and shipping services are the pressing common aspirations of the people across the straits .
He urged Taiwan authorities to give much consideration to people 's interests and lift man-made barriers , in order to realize the direct exchanges as early as possible .
When asked to comment that many Taiwan political personages want to come to the mainland to exchange views on political issues , the spokesman said , Beijing welcomes various parties and people from all walks of life in Taiwan to exchange views with mainland departments and personages concerned on relations across the straits , and the peaceful reunification of the motherland .
Commenting on last year 's struggle against splittism and `` Taiwan independence , '' the spokesman said the struggle against the `` Taiwan independence '' launched since last June `` has fully shown the determination and capability of the Chinese people , the Communist Party of China and the Chinese Government in safeguarding China 's sovereignty and territorial integrity , and they have heavily cracked down on the splitting forces in Taiwan and exerted great influence for the promotion of the peaceful reunification . ''
He stressed that `` our struggle against the ` Taiwan independence ' and splittism is not one between democracy and anti-democracy , but a struggle between those advocating ` Taiwan independence ' and splittism and those opposing ` Taiwan independence ' and splittism .
The spokesman said Taiwan also overreaches itself by claiming that it will `` guide the development direction of the mainland . ''
Taiwan authorities ignored the fact that the mainland has been enjoying a political stability , has witnessed great economic growth and has strengthened its comprehensive national strength , in addition to the daily improving of its international status and its constantly growing influence in the international community since its reform and opening up to the outside world 18 years ago , the spokesman added .
`` We put our hopes on the Taiwan compatriots , '' the spokesman said , urging the people across the straits , compatriots in Hong Kong and Macao , and all other overseas compatriots to further close their ranks and oppose splittism and cast aside the `` Taiwan independence . ''
He also called for increased economic cooperation and exchanges in various fields across the straits , an early realization of direct exchanges of mail , trade , air and shipping services , and continued struggle for the reunification of China .
