The fresh development of China - U.S. economic and trade cooperation will not only benefit the two peoples , but will also breathe new life into economic growth and prosperity in the Asia - Pacific and the world at large , the editorial said .
During his visit , Jiang held broad contacts with peoples from the U.S. political circles , the business , commerce and science and technology sectors , as well as representatives of the local Chinese community .
In his major speeches delivered in Washington , New York , Boston and Los Angeles , Jiang briefed the audiences on China 's achievements in its reform and opening up , its independent and peace-oriented foreign policy and its domestic policies .
He also elaborated on China 's basic views and consistent position on democracy , rule of law , human rights , ethnic groups and religion .
`` All these will certainly exert a tremendous influence on helping the American people know more about China , '' the article said .
`` Following a pragmatic style of diplomacy , President Jiang shows great foresight in seeking common ground on major issues and making friends with the broad masses of the people .
Such a diplomatic style won acclaim from the public , '' it said .
The building of a constructive strategic partnership between the two countries is aimed to safeguard world peace , promote common development and push forward the progressive causes of the entire mankind .
This is not only in the basic interests of the two peoples of the United States and China , but also in the common interests of other peoples in the world , the editorial added .
It said the China - U.S. constructive strategic partnership is not a relationship of exclusiveness but one of equality and mutual respect .
`` To establish such a relationship does not mean that there is no difference between two countries .
`` We have all along held the view that differences between China and the U.S. should be discussed on the basis of mutual respect and equality and addressed through appropriate ways , so as to reduce or resolve them . ''
The editorial said the two sides should seek common ground while reserving their differences that cannot be ironed out for the time being .
`` These differences should not become barriers to the enhancement of their mutually beneficial cooperation . ''
On the Taiwan question , the article said it has always been the single most important and most sensitive central issue in China - U.S. relations .
`` Strictly abiding by the three U.S. - China joint communiques and properly handling the Taiwan question hold the key to the healthy and steady development of China - U.S. ties . ''
The editorial noted Jiang 's reiteration of China 's position and principles on Taiwan .
`` The Chinese government and people will never allow any forces , under any pretexts , to create ` two Chinas ' or ` one China , one Taiwan ' .
Nor will it allow any forces to interfere in China 's internal affairs . ''
The U.S. side also reiterated its one China policy , promising that Washington would continue to stick to the principles enshrined in the three joint communiques and would not support the proposals of `` two Chinas '' , `` one China , one Taiwan '' , nor Taiwan 's independence , nor its bid to enter the United Nations .
`` We believe that China - U.S. relations would enjoy a smooth development as long as the United States proceeds from the consideration of the overall situation and stick to principles enshrined in the three joint communiques , '' the paper said .
