BEIJING , March 22 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Some pro- Taiwan authorities forces in the U.S. have launched an adverse current against China , capitalizing on rumors fabricated by some judicial and intelligence officials with the U.S. government that China was involved in the `` political donation '' dispute and attempted to `` buy policy influence . ''
James Lilley , a former U.S. ambassador to China , is a particularly active one stirring up the anti- China current .
He stood out as one of the leading rumor-mongers .
In an article published in the `` Washington Times '' on March 17 , he wilfully heaped slanders upon the Chinese government , saying it had poured a huge sum of money into the U.S. election , and undertaken economic espionage activities .
The U.S. official viciously attacked some of China 's diplomats working in the U.S. by name , and even clamored to give China a `` lesson . ''
The Chinese government has strongly criticized the ill-motivated anti- China words as groundless .
But James Lilley , who is following the tenet that rumors , if repeated , might become truth , has picked on the anti- China rubbish .
Lilley 's disgusting performance cannot but arouse righteous indignation among people who care for and support the development of Sino - U.S. relations .
Why is James Lilley so hostile towards China and the Chinese people ?
We can get the answer from a glimpse of his past .
Lilley , now director of the Institute for Global Chinese Affairs at the University of Maryland , used to be in close contact with the Taiwan authorities during his stay there .
Lilley was the U.S. ambassador to China in the late 1980s , and normally he should do something conducive to the improvement of Sino - U.S. relations .
But instead , he dashed into the arms of the Taiwan authorities as soon as he stepped down , and briskly shuttled between the United States and Taiwan to serve as the mouthpiece of the Taiwan authorities in the United States .
Lilley , under the cloak of former U.S. ambassador to China , busied himself defaming China , undermining the Sino - U.S. ties , and fawning on the anti- China and pro- Taiwan forces in the United States .
He publicly preaches `` two Chinas '' and `` one China , one Taiwan '' and masterminds Taiwan 's scheme to return to the international arena .
But his moves are despised by anyone responsible and concerned about the Sino - U.S. relations .
