BEIJING , March 24 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Experts on Taiwan affairs warned that the Taiwan authorities have taken a new step on the road to `` Taiwan independence '' by inviting the Dalai Lama to visit Taiwan .
The Beijing -based Taiwan Studies Society called together a dozen scholars today to give comments on Dalai Lama 's visit to Taiwan .
The scholars noted that the Dalai Lama was not conducting purely religious activities in Taiwan , but his visit represented an open convergence of `` Taiwan independence '' and `` Tibet independence '' forces , nothing less than political activities to split the motherland .
They said the mainland will unswervingly carry out the eight-point proposal put forward by Chinese President Jiang Zemin and to promote economic , cultural and personnel exchanges between the two sides of the Taiwan Straits .
Xu Bodong , a professor of Beijing University , said that the Taiwan authorities , in order to confront the one- China principle and undermine the peaceful reunification of the motherland , have gone too far by hanging around the `` Tibet independence '' forces .
The separatist action of the Taiwan authorities will deteriorate relations across the Straits and be censured by all Chinese people , including those in Hong Kong , Macao and Taiwan , Xu said .
According to Huang Jiashu , a professor of People 's University of China , Taiwan authorities ' invitation of the Dalai Lama is aimed at building the strength of their contention with the mainland , promoting their `` practical diplomacy '' with the help of Dalai Lama 's `` international influence '' , and containing Sino - US relations by creating a new tense situation across the Straits .
On the other hand , the Dalai Lama wants to reinforce his `` Tibet independence '' activity with the aid of `` Taiwan independence '' forces , and at the same time raise money for his separatist activities , the professor said .
In Taiwan , some senior religious figures refused to meet with the Dalai Lama , which indicated that he was not engaged in pure religious activities at all , but that he had political and economic motives , the professor said .
Li Jiaquan , a professor of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences , said that some separatist forces and international anti- China forces have attempted to impose pressures on the Chinese government by means of political conspiracy to separate Taiwan and Tibet from the motherland , but they are doomed to failure .
