BEIJING , March 22 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Some pro- Taiwan authorities forces in the U.S. have launched an adverse current against China , capitalizing on rumors fabricated by some judicial and intelligence officials with the U.S. government that China was involved in the `` political donation '' dispute and attempted to `` buy policy influence . ''
James Lilley , a former U.S. ambassador to China , is a particularly active one stirring up the anti- China current .
He stood out as one of the leading rumor-mongers .
In an article published in the `` Washington Times '' on March 17 , he wilfully heaped slanders upon the Chinese government , saying it had poured a huge sum of money into the U.S. election , and undertaken economic espionage activities .
The U.S. official viciously attacked some of China 's diplomats working in the U.S. by name , and even clamored to give China a `` lesson . ''
The Chinese government has strongly criticized the ill-motivated anti- China words as groundless .
But James Lilley , who is following the tenet that rumors , if repeated , might become truth , has picked on the anti- China rubbish .
Lilley 's disgusting performance cannot but arouse righteous indignation among people who care for and support the development of Sino - U.S. relations .
Why is James Lilley so hostile towards China and the Chinese people ?
We can get the answer from a glimpse of his past .
Lilley , now director of the Institute for Global Chinese Affairs at the University of Maryland , used to be in close contact with the Taiwan authorities during his stay there .
Lilley was the U.S. ambassador to China in the late 1980s , and normally he should do something conducive to the improvement of Sino - U.S. relations .
But instead , he dashed into the arms of the Taiwan authorities as soon as he stepped down , and briskly shuttled between the United States and Taiwan to serve as the mouthpiece of the Taiwan authorities in the United States .
Lilley , under the cloak of former U.S. ambassador to China , busied himself defaming China , undermining the Sino - U.S. ties , and fawning on the anti- China and pro- Taiwan forces in the United States .
He publicly preaches `` two Chinas '' and `` one China , one Taiwan '' and masterminds Taiwan 's scheme to return to the international arena .
But his moves are despised by anyone responsible and concerned about the Sino - U.S. relations .
It is no coincidence that James Lilley rushed out into the open at this moment and fell into an anti- China hysteria .
Behind , there is profound political background .
As the initiator of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence , China always respects sovereignty of other countries and has never interfered with other nations ' internal affairs .
China resolutely opposes any attempts to poke nose into other nations ' domestic affairs .
Only the Taiwan authorities , James Lilley and his like are `` masters '' of money diplomacy .
It is still clearly remembered that as early as in the 1950s , the Taiwan authorities spared no money to bribe U.S. congressmen and politicians to form the `` China Lobby . ''
After the establishment of diplomatic relationship between China and the United States , they refused to face up to the fact of the improvement of Sino - U.S. relations and poured more money into the United States .
With the money , they lured a handful of people to advertise `` two Chinas '' or `` one China , one Taiwan '' in Washington , making the `` Taiwan Lobby '' a `` champion '' in the United States capital .
It has been already an open secret in Washington that James Lilley himself is one of the politicians heavily bribed by the Taiwan authorities into barking for Taiwan .
Not long ago , it was exposed that the Taiwan authorities has been carrying on money politics in the United States .
To cover it up , some people were too impatient to try to lead public attention to the Chinese mainland .
James Lilley is a stereotype of these people whose groundless attacks on China not only aim to defame the image of China , to poison the atmosphere of Sino - U.S. relations , but also to cover their scandalous business with the Taiwan authorities .
The Chinese saying `` a thief crying stop thief '' is more than apt to describe what James Lilley has been doing .
James Lilley and others like him jumped onto the stage and their performance also gave a lesson to those who care for Sino - U.S. relations .
The lesson was that there is always a handful of people with hateful sentiments in dark corners attempting to block progress in Sino - U.S. relations .
No sooner is there a sign of disturbance than they will jump to the fore and try , leaving no stone unturned , to turn back the wheel of history .
But Sino - U.S. relations will , in the long run , become better , because it is the strong will of both the peoples to decide in the basic interests of two countries , and hence it is impossible for any anti- China force to thwart it .
No matter what James Lilley and his like do , they are doomed to end in complete failure , like a mantis trying to stop a chariot .
