BEIJING , November 18 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Chinese Vice - Premier and Foreign Minister Qian Qichen said today that China attaches great importance to developing friendly cooperative ties with Madagascar and is willing to conduct comprehensive cooperation with the country .
Qian made the remarks today during talks with Herizo Ragafimahaleo , vice-premier and foreign minister of Madagascar .
Qian welcomed his counterpart 's visit to China to celebrate the 25th Anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between the two countries .
He noted that bilateral ties have entered a new and higher stage since the two nations signed a joint communique on the establishment of diplomatic relations .
He noted that bilateral relations have advanced steadily along with great changes in the national situation in both countries .
Qian noted that the two nations have established diversified cooperation in the realm of politics , economic development , public health and culture .
Ragafimahaleo cited China as a country with important influence in world and said his country places high value on the development of bilateral relations .
Madagascar and China have maintained friendly and sincere cooperative ties for the past 25 years , and both nations are working diligently to further enhance and consolidate such ties , said Ragafimahaleo .
Ragafimahaleo expressed sincere gratitude for Chinese aid , and expressed hope for strengthened economic and trade cooperation between the governments and enterprises in the two nations .
Qian briefed Ragafimahaleo on China 's resumption of sovereignty over Hong Kong , and pointed to the fact that the special administrative region has maintained social stability and economic prosperity since its return to the motherland , a fact which he attributed to the correctness of the `` one county , two systems '' principle .
Qian stressed that China will abide by the principle when dealing with issues related to Macao and Taiwan .
Ragafimahaleo offered his congratulations on the smooth return of Hong Kong .
He noted that Madagascar hopes China will achieve peaceful reunification , and supports the Chinese government 's stand on the issue of Taiwan .
There is only one China and Taiwan is a province of the People 's Republic of China , said Ragafimahaleo .
He expressed hope that the Chinese people will realize their motherland 's reunification .
The two officials also exchanged views on international issues , the situation in Africa , and other issues of common concern .
Qian and Ragafimahaleo expressed the hope for enhanced cooperation in the realm of international affairs .
