
 Sociobiology connects evolutionary theory to human culture

Recall that the main premise of sociobiology is that certain behavioral characteristics exist because they are expressions of genes that have been perpetuated by natural selection. In the last chapter of Sociobiology: The New Synthesis, E. O. Wilson speculated about the evolutionary basis of certain kinds of social behavior, including culture, in humans. The debate about the connection between biological evolution and human culture remains heated today.

The spectrum of possible human social behaviors may be circumscribed by our genetic potential, but this is very different from saying that genes are rigid determinants of behavior. This is at the core of the debate about sociobiology. Opponents fear that a sociobiological interpretation of human behavior can be used to justify the status quo in human society, thus rationalizing current social injustices. Sociobiologists argue that this is a gross oversimplification and misunderstanding of what the data tell us about human biology. Sociobiology does not reduce us to robots stamped out of rigid genetic molds. Individuals vary extensively in anatomical features, and we should expect inherent variations in behavior as well. Furthermore, though we are locked into our genotypes, our nervous systems are not "hardwired." Environment intervenes in the pathway from genotype to phenotype for physical traits and even more so for behavioral traits. And because of our capacity for learning and versatility, human behavior is probably more plastic than that of any other animal. Over our recent evolutionary history, we have built up a diversity of structured societies with governments, laws, cultural values, and religions that define what is acceptable behavior and what is not, even when unacceptable behavior might enhance an individual's Darwinian fitness. Perhaps it is our social and cultural institutions that make us truly unique and that provide the only feature in which there is no continuum between humans and other animals (FIGURE 51.32).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 51-32. Both genes and culture build human nature. Teaching of the younger generation by the older is one of the basic ways in which all cultures are transmitted. Sociobiologists see mentoring as an innate tendency with adaptive value that has evolved in the human species.

In this chapter, we have examined the role of behavior in the relationship between animals and their environment. We have focused on the proximate mechanisms underlying behavior and on how particular behavior patterns contribute to an animal's survival and reproductive success. In studying an animal's behavior, we are watching it perform on an ecological stage, a setting where evolution by natural selection determines which individuals contribute the greatest number of genes to a population's gene pool. In the next chapter, we take a closer look at populations as ecological and evolutionary units.




