
 Systematists can infer phylogeny from molecular data

When tracing phylogeny and classifying organisms, it is useful to compare macromolecules as well as anatomical characters. If homology reflects common ancestry, then comparing the genes and gene products (proteins) of organisms gets right to the heart of their evolutionary relationships. Sequences of nucleotides in DNA are inherited, and they program corresponding sequences of amino acids in proteins. At the molecular level, the evolutionary divergence of species parallels the accumulation of differences in their genomes. The more recently two species have branched from a common ancestor, the more similar their DNA and amino acid sequences should be. Today, both the amino acid sequences for many proteins and the nucleotide sequences for a rapidly expanding archive of DNA from diverse species are in databases available via the Internet. This has catalyzed a boom in systematics, as researchers use the databases to trace phylogeny by comparing the hereditary information of different species.

Molecular systematics makes it possible to assess phylogenetic relationships that cannot be measured by comparative anatomy and other nonmolecular methods. One application is comparison of species too closely related to display much divergence in morphology. At the other extreme, molecular systematics makes it possible to trace evolutionary relationships of species that are so different that there is little morphological homology; for example, it would be impossible to tell from morphology that fungi are more closely related to animals than they are to plants. Thus, molecular biology helps extend phylogenetic systematics to the extremes of evolutionary relationships, to the major branches and the finest twigs of the tree of life.

Phylogenetic Data from DNA Sequences

Systematists use a variety of methods to compare the proteins and nucleic acids of species, but most research is now based on comparison of nucleotide sequences in DNA or RNA. Each nucleotide position along a stretch of DNA represents an inherited character in the form of one of the four DNA bases: A (adenine), G (guanine), C (cytosine), or T (thymine). Thus, homologous regions of DNA from two species that are 1,000 nucleotides long provide 1,000 points of comparison. And a systematist may compare several DNA regions to assess the relationship between two species. Automated DNA sequencers enable researchers to collect an enormous amount of data, and computers make it possible to analyze the extensive quantity of genetic information. This DNA sequence analysis provides a quantitative tool for constructing cladograms with branch points defined by mutations in DNA sequence that mark each clade--the shared derived characters of molecular systematics.

The rates of change in DNA sequences over evolutionary time vary from one part of the genome to another. The DNA coding for ribosomal RNA (rRNA) changes relatively slowly, so comparisons of DNA sequences in these genes (or their products, rRNA) is useful for investigating relationships between taxa that diverged hundreds of millions of years ago. For example, systematists have focused on rRNA genes to help sort out the phylogeny of the animal phyla. In contrast, the DNA in mitochondria (mtDNA) evolves relatively rapidly. Thus, some systematists compare mtDNA sequences to assess the phylogeny of species that are relatively closely related or even populations of the same species. For example, one research team used mtDNA sequences to trace the relationships between different groups of Native Americans. Their results corroborate evidence that the Pima of Arizona, the Maya of Mexico, and the Yanomami of Venezuela are closely related, probably descending from the first of three waves of immigrants to cross the Bering Land Bridge from Asia to the Americas during the glaciation of the late Pleistocene epoch.

Aligning the DNA Sequences

DNA comparisons pose technical challenges. The first step in analyzing the genetic data is to align homologous DNA sequences from the two species we are comparing. If the two species have diverged from a common ancestor relatively recently, the sequences of homologous regions of DNA will probably be identical in length. Of course, along this homologous sequence, the two species may differ in which base is present at one or a few sites. In contrast, less closely related species may have homologous DNA sequences that differ not only in the bases at certain sites but also in their total length. This is because of an accumulation over evolutionary time of mutations such as insertions and deletions that alter the lengths of genes (see Chapter 17). Suppose, for example, that two DNA sequences were very similar, but a deletion mutation eliminated the first base of the sequence in one of the species. This would shift the remaining sequence forward a notch, and a point-by-point comparison of the two sequences would then distort what in fact is a very good match. FIGURE 25.13 illustrates a simplified example of how systematists use computer programs to align homologous DNA segments that differ in length.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 25-13. Aligning segments of DNA. This simplified example illustrates how insertion and deletion mutations can alter the length of DNA segments and make point-by-point comparison between two species challenging. Systematists use computer programs that search for similar sequences along the DNA segments from the two species. The programs then reestablish alignment by inserting gaps in one DNA segment to compensate for mutations that altered sequence length. This now makes it possible to compare sequences in homologous regions along the DNA segments. (In this example, the homologous sequences are identical.)




