
 Gastrulation rearranges the blastula to form a three-layered embryo with a primitive gut

The morphogenetic process called gastrulation is a dramatic rearrangement of the cells of the blastula. Gastrulation differs in detail from one animal group to another, but a common set of cellular changes drives this spatial rearrangement of an embryo. These general cellular mechanisms are changes in cell motility, changes in cell shape, and changes in cellular adhesion to other cells and to molecules of the extracellular matrix (see FIGURE 7.29). The result of gastrulation is that some of the cells at or near the surface of the blastula move to an interior location, and three cell layers are established. The three-layered embryo is called the gastrula. The positioning of the cell layers in the gastrula allows cells to interact with each other in new ways.

The three layers produced by gastrulation are embryonic tissues called ectoderm, endoderm, and mesoderm, also collectively termed the embryonic germ layers. The ectoderm forms the outer layer of the gastrula; the endoderm lines the embryonic digestive tract; and the mesoderm partly fills the space between the ectoderm and the endoderm. Eventually, these three cell layers develop into all the parts of the adult animal. For instance, our nervous system and the outer layer (epidermis) of our skin come from ectoderm; the innermost lining of our digestive tract and associated organs, such as the liver and pancreas, arise from endoderm; and most other organs and tissues, such as the kidney, heart, muscles, and the inner layer of our skin (dermis), develop largely from mesoderm.

Let's examine gastrulation in a sea urchin embryo (FIGURE 47.9). The wall of the sea urchin blastula consists of a single layer of cells. Gastrulation begins at the vegetal pole where individual cells detach from the blastula wall and enter the blastocoel as migratory cells called mesenchyme cells. The remaining cells flatten slightly to form a vegetal plate that buckles inward, a process called invagination. The buckled vegetal plate then undergoes extensive rearrangement of its cells, a process that transforms the shallow invagination into a deeper, narrower pouch called the archenteron, or primitive gut. The open end of the archenteron, which will become the anus, is called the blastopore. A second opening forms at the other end of the archenteron, forming the mouth end of what is now a rudimentary digestive tube. Gastrulation has produced an embryo with a primitive gut and three germ layers: ectoderm (color-coded blue throughout this chapter), endoderm (yellow), and mesoderm (red). Thus, the triploblastic (three-layered) body plan characteristic of most animal phyla is established very early in development (see FIGURE 32.6). In the sea urchin, the gastrula eventually develops into a ciliated larva that drifts near the ocean surface as plankton, feeding on bacteria and unicellular algae.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 47-9. Sea urchin gastrulation. 
			  
		 Formed by cleavage, the blastula consists of a single layer of ciliated cells surrounding the blastocoel. Gastrulation begins with the migration of mesenchyme cells from the flattened "vegetal plate" into the blastocoel. 
			  
		 The vegetal plate in this early gastrula invaginates (buckles inward). Mesenchyme cells begin to form thin extensions (filopodia). 
			  
		 Endoderm cells form the archenteron (future digestive tube). Mesenchyme cells form filopodial connections between the tip of the archenteron and the ectoderm cells of the blastocoel wall (inset, LM). 
			  
		 Contraction of the filopodia in a late gastrula drags the archenteron the rest of the way across the blastocoel, where the endoderm of the archenteron will fuse with ectoderm of the blastocoel wall. 
			  
		 Gastrulation is complete. The gastrula has a functional digestive tube formed from the endoderm of the archenteron, with a mouth and an anus. Ectoderm forms the embryo's ciliated outer surface. Some of the mesenchyme cells of the mesoderm have secreted calcium carbonate (CaCO3), which will form a simple internal skeleton.

Gastrulation during frog development also produces a three-layered embryo with an archenteron, as shown in FIGURE 47.10. The mechanics of gastrulation are more complicated in a frog, however, because of the large, yolk-laden cells of the vegetal hemisphere, and because the wall of the blastula is more than one cell thick in most species. The first sign of gastrulation is a small crease on one side of the blastula caused by the invagination of a group of cells there. This invagination becomes the dorsal side of the blastopore, called the dorsal lip of the blastopore. The dorsal lip of the blastopore forms where the gray crescent was located in the zygote (see FIGURE 47.7). Successive invaginations of groups of cells near the dorsal lip result in the completion of the circular blastopore.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 47-10. Gastrulation in a frog embryo.

Frog gastrulation continues with cells on the surface of the embryo rolling over the edge of the dorsal lip into the interior of the embryo, a process called involution. Once inside the embryo, these cells move away from the blastopore along the roof of the blastocoel. Involution continues, with migrating internal cells becoming organized into layered mesoderm and endoderm, and the archenteron forming within the endoderm. Eventually, the complex cell movements of gastrulation produce a three-layered embryo. As the process is completed, the circular lip of the blastopore encircles a yolk plug consisting of large, food-laden cells; these protruding cells will move inward as expansion of the ectoderm causes the blastopore to shrink. At this point, the cells remaining on the surface make up the ectoderm, surrounding the layers of mesoderm and endoderm. With the three germ layers in place, gastrulation is complete, and the embryo's organs begin to form.




