
 Human activities are depleting atmospheric ozone

Life on Earth is protected from the damaging effects of ultraviolet (UV) radiation by a protective layer of ozone molecules (O3) that is present in the lower stratosphere between 17 and 25 km above Earth's surface. Ozone absorbs UV radiation, preventing much of it from contacting organisms in the biosphere. Satellite studies of the atmosphere suggest that the ozone layer has been gradually "thinning" since 1975 (FIGURE 54.27).

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 54-27. Erosion of Earth's ozone shield. (a) Ozone hole. The ozone hole over the Antarctic is visible as the blue patch in this image based on atmospheric data (b) Thickness of the ozone layer. This graph tracks the thickness of the ozone layer in units called Dobsons. (c) Exposure to UV radiation. Australia, home to these sun lovers, already has the world's highest rate of skin cancer. More intense UV radiation through an eroded ozone shield increases the cancer risk.

The destruction of atmospheric ozone probably results mainly from the accumulation of chlorofluorocarbons, chemicals used for refrigeration, as propellants in aerosol cans, and in certain manufacturing processes. When the breakdown products from these chemicals rise to the stratosphere, the chlorine they contain reacts with ozone, reducing it to molecular O2. Subsequent chemical reactions liberate the chlorine, allowing it to react with other ozone molecules in a catalytic chain reaction. The effect is most apparent over Antarctica, where cold winter temperatures facilitate these atmospheric reactions. Scientists first described the "ozone hole" over Antarctica in 1985 and have since documented that it is a seasonal phenomenon that grows and shrinks in an annual cycle. However, the magnitude of ozone depletion and the size of the ozone hole have generally increased in recent years, and the hole sometimes extends as far as the southernmost portions of Australia, New Zealand, and South America. At the more heavily populated middle latitudes, ozone levels have decreased 2-10%  during the past 20 years.

The consequences of ozone depletion for life on Earth may be quite severe. Some scientists expect increases in both lethal and nonlethal forms of skin cancer and in cataracts among humans, as well as unpredictable effects on crops and natural communities, especially the phytoplankton that are responsible for a large proportion of Earth's primary production. The danger posed by ozone depletion is so great that many nations have agreed to end the production of chlorofluorocarbons within a decade. Unfortunately, even if all chlorofluorocarbons were totally banned today, chlorine molecules that are already in the atmosphere will continue to influence stratospheric ozone levels for at least a century.

The human impact on Earth's ozone shield is just one more example of how far our technological tentacles reach in disrupting the dynamics of ecosystems and the entire biosphere. How are human activities affecting Earth's biodiversity? In the last chapter of this book, we explore that question and highlight how progress in conservation biology may help slow the loss of species.




