
Chapter 20: DNA TECHNOLOGY AND GENOMICS

DNA CLONING

   DNA technology makes it possible to clone genes for basic research and commercial applications: an overview

   Restriction enzymes are used to make recombinant DNA

   Genes can be cloned in recombinant DNA vectors: a closer look

   Cloned genes are stored in DNA libraries

   The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) clones DNA entirely in vitro



DNA ANALYSIS AND GENOMICS

   Restriction fragment analysis detects DNA differences that affect restriction sites

   Entire genomes can be mapped at the DNA level

   Genome sequences provide clues to important biological questions



PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF DNA TECHNOLOGY

   DNA technology is reshaping medicine and the pharmaceutical industry

   DNA technology offers forensic, environmental, and agricultural applications

   DNA technology raises important safety and ethical questions

The photo on this page shows a room of machines that are sequencing human DNA at the rate of 350,000 nucleotides per machine per day. The mapping and sequencing of the human genome, one of the great achievements of modern science, has been made possible by advances in DNA technology, starting with the invention of methods for making recombinant DNA. This is DNA in which genes from two different sources--often different species--are combined in vitro into the same molecule.

The methods for making recombinant DNA are also central to genetic engineering, the direct manipulation of genes for practical purposes. Applications include the manufacture of hundreds of products. Using DNA technology, scientists can make recombinant DNA and then introduce it into cultured cells that replicate the DNA and may express its genes, yielding a desired protein. The bacterium E. coli is often used as a "host" organism for recombinant DNA because it is easy to grow and its biochemistry is well understood.

DNA technology has launched a revolution in biotechnology. In broad terms, biotechnology is the manipulation of organisms or their components to make useful products. Practices that go back centuries, such as the use of microbes to make wine and cheese and the selective breeding of livestock, are examples of biotechnology. Natural genetic processes, such as mutation and genetic recombination, have always been involved. But biotechnology based on the manipulation of DNA in vitro differs from earlier practices by enabling scientists to modify specific genes and move them between organisms as distinct as bacteria, plants, and animals.

DNA technology is now applied in areas ranging from agriculture to criminal law, but its most important achievements have been in basic research. DNA technology has stimulated discoveries in virtually all fields of biology by giving researchers new tools for tackling age-old questions. And it is providing us with detailed knowledge of the genomes of humans and many other organisms, knowledge largely inaccessible only a few decades ago.

In this chapter, we describe the main techniques of DNA manipulation, discuss how genomes are analyzed at the DNA level, and survey the practical applications of DNA technology. In a concluding section, we consider some of the social and ethical issues that arise as DNA technology becomes more pervasive in our lives.




