
 Other evidence of evolution pervades biology

We have examined cases of evolution by natural selection that occur rapidly enough to be directly observed. However, the much grander changes of biological diversity documented by the fossil record occur on a time scale spanning hundreds of millions of years. Evidence that the diversity of life is a product of evolution prevades every research field of biology. And, as biology progresses, new discoveries, including the revelations of molecular biology, continue to validate the Darwinian view of life.

Homology

Descent with modification, Darwin's term for evolution, means that new species descend from ancestral species by the accumulation of modifications as populations adapt to new environments. The novel features that characterize a new species are not entirely new, but are altered versions of ancestral features. Species with common ancestry should display underlying similarities, even in features that no longer match in function. Similarity in characteristics resulting from common ancestry is known as homology.

Anatomical Homologies. Descent with modification is indeed evident in anatomical similarities between species grouped in the same taxonomic category. For example, many of the same skeletal elements make up the forelimbs of humans, cats, whales, bats, and all other mammals, although these appendages have very different functions (FIGURE 22.14). Surely, the best way to construct the infrastructure of a bat's wing is not also the best way to build a whale's flipper. Such anatomical peculiarities make no sense if the structures are uniquely engineered and unrelated. A more likely explanation is that the basic similarity of these forelimbs is the consequence of the descent of all mammals from a common ancestor. The forelegs, wings, flippers, and arms of different mammals are variations on a common structural theme. In taking on different functions in each species, the basic structures were modified. Such anatomical signs of evolution are called homologous structures.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 22-14. Homologous structures: anatomical signs of descent with modification. The forelimbs of all mammals are constructed from the same skeletal elements (color-coded in these diagrams). The hypothesis that all mammals descend from a common ancestor predicts that their forelimbs, though diversely adapted, would be variations on a common anatomical theme.

Comparative anatomy, the comparison of body structures between species, confirms that evolution is a remodeling process. The historical constraints of this retrofitting are evident in anatomical imperfections. For example, the human knee joint and spine were derived from ancestral structures that supported four-legged mammals. Almost none of us will reach old age without experiencing knee or back problems. If these structures had first taken form specifically to support our bipedal posture, we would expect them to be less subject to injury. The anatomical remodeling that stood us up was apparently constrained by our evolutionary history.

Some of the most interesting homologous structures are vestigial organs, structures of marginal, if any, importance to the organism. Vestigial organs are historical remnants of structures that had important functions in ancestors. For instance, the skeletons of some snakes retain vestiges of the pelvis and leg bones of walking ancestors. We would not expect to see these structures if snakes had an origin separate from other vertebrate animals.

Embryological Homologies. Sometimes, homologies that are not obvious in adult organisms become evident when we look at embryonic development. For example, all vertebrate embryos have structures called pharyngeal pouches in their throat regions at some stage in their development. These embryonic structures develop into homologous structures with very different functions, such as the gills of fish or the Eustachian tubes that connect the middle ear with the throat in humans and other mammals.

Molecular Homologies. Anatomical homology cannot help us link such distantly related organisms as plants and animals, which have no anatomy in common. However, plants and animals, along with all other organisms, do share certain characteristics at the molecular level: For example, all species of life use the same basic genetic machinery of DNA and RNA, and the genetic code is essentially universal (see Chapter 17). Evidently, the language of the genetic code has been passed along through all branches of the tree of life ever since the code's inception in an early life-form. Molecular biology provides new tools for exploring evolutionary relationships in the diversity of life.

Homologies and the Tree of Life. Homologies mirror the taxonomic hierarchy of the tree of life. Some homologies, such as the genetic code, are shared by all life because they date back to the deep ancestral past. Homologies that evolved more recently are shared only by smaller branches of the tree of life. For example, all tetrapods (from the Greek tetra, "four," and pod, "foot"), the vertebrate branch consisting of amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals, share the same basic five-digit limb structure illustrated for mammals in FIGURE 22.14. Thus, homologies form a layered pattern, with all life sharing the deepest layer and each smaller group adding fresh homologies to those they share with larger groups. This hierarchical pattern is exactly what we would expect if life evolved and diversified from a common ancestor, but not what we would see if each species arose separately.

If homologies reflect evolutionary history, we should expect to find similar patterns whether we are comparing molecules or bones or any other characteristics. The new tools of molecular biology have generally corroborated rather than contradicted evolutionary trees based on comparative anatomy and other methods. Evolutionary relationships among species are documented in their DNA and proteins--in their genes and gene products. If two species have libraries of genes and proteins with sequences that match closely, the sequences have probably been copied from a common ancestor. (If two long paragraphs match except for the substitution of a letter here and there, we would surely attribute them both to a single source.) TABLE 22.1 compares the amino acid sequence of human hemoglobin, the oxygen-transporting protein of blood, with the hemoglobin of other vertebrates. The data show the same pattern of evolutionary relationships that researchers find when they compare other proteins or assess relationships based on nonmolecular methods, such as skeletal anatomy. The Darwinian view of life predicts that different kinds of homologies--anatomical, embryological, and molecular--will fall into the same hierarchical pattern because they have all evolved during the same branching pattern of evolutionary history.

Table 22-1. Molecular Data and the Evolutionary Relationships of Vertebrates

SpeciesNumber of Amino Acids That Differ from a Human Hemoglobin Polypeptide (Total Chain Length = 146 Amino Acids)Human



0Rhesus monkey



8Mouse



27Chicken



45Frog



67Lamprey



125Biogeography

The geographic distribution of species--biogeography--first suggested evolution to Darwin. Species tend to be more closely related to other species from the same area than to other species with the same way of life but living in different areas. For example, Australia is the home of a group of mammals--the marsupials--that are distinct from another group of mammals--the eutherians--that live elsewhere on Earth. (Eutherians are mammals that complete their embryonic development in the uterus, while marsupials are born as embryos and complete their development in an external pouch.) Some Australian marsupials have eutherian look-alikes with similar adaptations living on other continents. For example, a forest-dwelling marsupial called the sugar glider is superficially very similar to flying squirrels, eutherians that live in North American forests (FIGURE 22.15). These two mammals have adapted to the same way of life, but they evolved independently from different ancestors. The sugar glider is distinctly marsupial, much more closely related to kangaroos and other Australian marsupials than to flying squirrels or any other eutherian mammals. The sugar glider is a marsupial not because that is a requirement for its gliding lifestyle but simply because its ancestors were marsupials. The unique fauna of Australia diversified on that island continent after it became isolated from the landmasses on which placental mammals diversified. The resemblance between sugar gliders and flying squirrels is an example of what biologists call convergent evolution (we'll take a closer look at convergence in Chapter 25).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 22-15. Different geographic regions, different mammalian "brands." The sugar glider is an example of the diverse marsupial life that evolved in isolation on the island continent of Australia. The resemblance of sugar gliders to the eutherian flying squirrels of North America is not due to a close evolutionary relationship but to convergent evolution in similar environmental contexts.

Islands are showcases of biogeographic evidence for evolution. They generally have many species of plants and animals that are endemic, which means they are found nowhere else in the world. And yet, as Darwin observed when he reassessed his collections from the voyage of the Beagle, most island species are closely related to species from the nearest mainland or neighboring island. This explains why two islands with similar environments in different parts of the world are populated not by closely related species but by species taxonomically affiliated with the plants and animals of the nearest mainland, where the environment is often quite different. Island chains, or archipelagos, are especially interesting in their biogeography. If a species that disperses from a mainland to an island succeeds in its new environment, it may give rise to several new species as populations spread to other islands in the archipelago. The example of finches on the Gal&aacute;pagos archipelago came up earlier in the chapter. FIGURE 22.16 illustrates another example, the evolution of fruit flies (Drosophila) on the Hawaiian archipelago.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 22-16. The evolution of fruit fly (Drosophila) species on the Hawaiian archipelago. Geologists have determined the ages of these volcanic islands, which are progressively younger from Kauai (the oldest) to the big island of Hawaii (the youngest, still growing as active volcanoes add lava rock to the shoreline). The islands have about 500 endemic species of the fruit fly genus Drosophila, all descended from a common ancestor that managed to reach Kauai over 5 million years ago. The arrows trace the history of just a few of the species in one evolutionary branch. The vintage of each species closely matches the age of its island home.

The Fossil Record

The succession of fossil forms is compatible with what is known from other types of evidence about the major branches of descent in the tree of life. For instance, evidence from biochemistry, molecular biology, and cell biology places prokaryotes as the ancestors of all life and predicts that prokaryotes should precede all eukaryotic life in the fossil record. Indeed, the oldest known fossils are prokaryotes. Another example is the chronological appearance of the different classes of vertebrate animals in the fossil record. Fossil fishes predate all other vertebrates, with amphibians next, followed by reptiles, then mammals and birds. This sequence is consistent with the history of vertebrate descent as revealed by many other types of evidence. In contrast, the idea that all species were individually created at about the same time predicts that all vertebrate classes would make their first appearance in the fossil record in rocks of the same age, a prediction at odds with what paleontologists actually observe.

The Darwinian view of life also predicts that evolutionary transitions should leave signs in the fossil record. Paleontologists have discovered fossils of many transitional forms that link even older fossils to modern species. For example, a series of fossils documents the changes in skull shape and size that occurred as mammals evolved from reptiles. Every year, paleontologists turn up other important links between modern forms and their ancestors. In the past few years, for instance, researchers have found fossilized whales that link these aquatic mammals to their terrestrial predecessors (FIGURE 22.17, p. 442).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 22-17. A transitional fossil linking past and present. The hypothesis that whales evolved from terrestrial (land-dwelling) ancestors predicts a four-limbed beginning for whales. Paleontologists digging in Egypt and Pakistan have identified extinct whales that had hind limbs. Shown here are the fossilized leg bones of Basilosaurus, one of those ancient whales. These whales were already aquatic animals that no longer used their legs to support their weight. The leg bones of an even older fossilized whale named Ambulocetus are heftier. Ambulocetus may have split its time between living on land and in water.

Thus, the Darwinian view of life endures in biology because it is supported by independent types of evidence: evolutionary patterns of homology that match patterns in space (biogeography) and time (the fossil record).




