
Chapter 26: EARLY EARTH AND THE ORIGIN OF LIFE

INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTORY OF LIFE

   Life on Earth originated between 3.5 and 4.0 billion years ago

   Prokaryotes dominated evolutionary history from 3.5 to 2.0 billion years ago

   Oxygen began accumulating in the atmosphere about 2.7 billion years ago

   Eukaryotic life began by 2.1 billion years ago

   Multicellular eukaryotes evolved by 1.2 billion years ago

   Animal diversity exploded during the early Cambrian period

   Plants, fungi, and animals colonized the land about 500 million years ago



THE ORIGIN OF LIFE

   The first cells may have originated by chemical evolution on a young Earth: an overview

   Abiotic synthesis of organic monomers is a testable hypothesis

   Laboratory simulations of early-Earth conditions have produced organic polymers

   RNA may have been the first genetic material

   Protobionts can form by self-assembly

   Natural selection could refine protobionts containing hereditary information

   Debate about the origin of life abounds



THE MAJOR LINEAGES OF LIFE

   The five-kingdom system reflected increased knowledge of life's diversity

   Arranging the diversity of life into the highest taxa is a work in progress

Life is a continuum extending from the earliest organisms through various phylogenetic branches to the great variety of forms alive today. In Unit Five, we will survey the diversity of life today and trace the evolution of this diversity over 3.8 billion years of history.

One of this book's ten themes is the interaction between organisms and their environments (see Chapter 1). We will see examples throughout this unit in the connections between biological history and geologic history. Geologic events that alter environments change the course of biological evolution. The formation and subsequent breakup of the supercontinent Pangaea, for instance, had a tremendous impact on the diversity of life (see Chapter 25). Conversely, life has changed the planet it inhabits. For example, the evolution of photosynthetic organisms that release oxygen into the air had a dramatic impact on Earth's atmosphere. (This early photosynthetic life included prokaryotes similar to those in the dense mats that resemble stepping stones in the painting of early Earth on this page.) Much more recently, the emergence of Homo sapiens has changed the land, water, and air on a scale and at a rate unprecedented for a single species. The histories of Earth and its life are inseparable.

These chapters also emphasize key junctures in evolution that have punctuated the history of biological diversity. Geologic history and biological history have been episodic, marked by what were in essence revolutions that opened many new ways of life.

Historical study of any sort is an inexact discipline that depends on the preservation, reliability, and interpretation of past records. The fossil record of past life is generally less and less complete the farther into the past we delve. Fortunately, each organism alive today carries traces of its evolutionary history in its molecules, metabolism, and anatomy. As we saw in Unit Four, such traces are clues to the past that augment the fossil record. Still, the evolutionary episodes of greatest antiquity are generally the most obscure.

This chapter begins with an overview of life's history. We then take a closer look at the origin of life. That discussion is the most speculative in the entire unit, for no fossil record of that seminal episode exists. The last section of the chapter introduces the main branches of life as a prelude to the survey of biological diversity in Chapters 27-34




