
 Phylum Rotifera: Rotifers are pseudocoelomates with jaws, crowns of cilia, and complete digestive tracts

Rotifers (about 1,800 species) are tiny animals that mainly inhabit fresh water, although some live in the sea or in damp soil. Ranging in size from only about 0.05 to 2.0 mm, smaller than many protists, rotifers are nevertheless truly multicellular and have specialized organ systems (FIGURE 33.13). In contrast to cnidarians and flatworms, which have gastrovascular cavities, rotifers have a complete digestive tract, which is a digestive tube with a separate mouth and anus. Internal organs lie within the pseudocoelom, a body cavity that is not completely lined by mesoderm (see FIGURE 32.6b). Fluid in the pseudocoelom serves as a hydrostatic skeleton and as a medium for the internal transport of nutrients and wastes in these tiny animals. Movement of a rotifer's body distributes the fluid within the pseudocoelom, and thus this body cavity and its fluid function as a circulatory system.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-13. A rotifer. These pseudocoelomates, smaller than many protists, are much more anatomically complex than flatworms (LM).

The word rotifer, derived from Latin, means "wheel-bearer," a reference to the crown of cilia that draws a vortex of water into the mouth. Posterior to the mouth, a region of the digestive tract called the pharynx bears jaws (trophi) that grind food, mostly microorganisms suspended in the water.

Rotifer reproduction is unusual. Some species consist only of females that produce more females from unfertilized eggs, a type of reproduction called parthenogenesis. Other species produce two types of eggs that develop by parthenogenesis, one type forming females and the other type developing into degenerate males that cannot even feed themselves. The males survive long enough to produce sperm that fertilize eggs, forming resistant zygotes that can survive when a pond dries up. When conditions are favorable again, the zygotes break dormancy and develop into a new female generation that then reproduces by parthenogenesis until conditions become unfavorable again.




