
 Xerophytes have evolutionary adaptations that reduce transpiration

Plants adapted to arid climates, called xerophytes, have various leaf modifications that reduce the rate of transpiration. Many xerophytes have small, thick leaves, an adaptation that limits water loss by reducing surface area relative to leaf volume. A thick cuticle gives some of these leaves a leathery consistency. The stomata are concentrated on the lower (shady) leaf surface, and they are often located in depressions that shelter the pores from the dry wind (FIGURE 36.15). During the driest months, some desert plants shed their leaves. Others, such as cacti, subsist on water the plant stores in its fleshy stems during the rainy season. (These modified stems are the photosynthetic organs of cacti; the spines are modified leaves.)



Click image to enlarge



Fig 36-15. Structural adaptations of a xerophyte leaf. Oleander (inset) is commonly planted along desert highways. The leaves have a thick cuticle and multiple-layered dermal tissue that reduce water loss. Stomata are recessed in "crypts," an adaptation that reduces the rate of transpiration by protecting the stomata from hot, dry wind. The trichomes ("hairs") also help minimize transpiration by breaking up the flow of air, allowing the chamber of the crypt to have a higher humidity than the surrounding atmosphere (LM).

One of the most elegant adaptations to arid habitats is found in ice plants and other succulent plants of the family Crassulaceae and in representatives of many other plant families. These plants assimilate CO2 by an alternative photosynthetic pathway known as CAM, for crassulacean acid metabolism (see FIGURE 10.19). Mesophyll cells in a CAM plant have enzymes that can incorporate CO2 into organic acids during the night. During the daytime, the organic acids are broken down to release CO2 in the same cells, and sugars are synthesized by the conventional (C3) photosynthetic pathway. Because the leaf takes in its CO2 at night, the stomata can close during the day, when transpiration is most severe.




