
 Animals adjust their metabolic rates as conditions change

Every animal has a range of metabolic rates. Minimal rates power the basic functions that support life, such as cell maintenance, breathing, and heartbeat. The metabolic rate of a nongrowing endotherm at rest, with an empty stomach, and experiencing no stress, is called the basal metabolic rate (BMR). The BMR for humans averages about 1,600 to 1,800 kcal per day for adult males and about 1,300 to 1,500 kcal per day for adult females. These BMRs are about equivalent to the energy consumption of a 75-watt light bulb.

In ectotherms, body temperature changes with the temperature of the surroundings, and so does metabolic rate. Unlike BMRs, which can be determined within a range of environmental temperatures, the minimal metabolic rate of an ectotherm must be determined at a specific temperature. The metabolic rate of a resting, fasting, nonstressed ectotherm is called its standard metabolic rate (SMR).

For both ectotherms and endotherms, activity has a large effect on metabolic rate. Any behavior, even a person working quietly at a desk or an insect extending its wings, consumes energy beyond the BMR or SMR. Maximal metabolic rates (the highest rates of ATP utilization) occur during peak activity, such as lifting heavy weights, all-out running, or high-speed swimming.

In general, an animal's maximum possible metabolic rate is inversely related to the duration of activity. FIGURE 40.12 contrasts the ectothermic and endothermic "strategies" for sustaining activity over different time intervals. Both an alligator (ectotherm) and a human (endotherm) are capable of very intense exercise in short spurts of a minute or less. During these "sprints," the ATP present in muscle cells and ATP generated anaerobically by glycolysis can power the activity. Neither the ectotherm nor the endotherm can sustain their maximum metabolic rates and peak levels of activity over longer periods of exercise, though the endotherm has an advantage in such endurance tests. Sustained activity depends on the aerobic process of cellular respiration for ATP supply, and an endotherm's respiration rate is about 10 times greater than an ectotherm's. Only endotherms are capable of long-duration activities such as distance running.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 40-12. Maximum metabolic rates over different time spans. The two bars at the far right compare the resting metabolic rates for an ectotherm (alligator) versus an endotherm (human) of equivalent size. Note the much higher energy cost required for the endothermic "strategy." The other bars compare the two animals for their maximum potential metabolic rates and ATP sources over different durations of time.

Between the extremes of BMR or SMR and maximal metabolic rate, many factors influence energy requirements, including age, sex, size, body and environmental temperatures, the quality and quantity of food, activity level, oxygen availability, hormonal balance, and time of day. Birds, humans, and many insects are usually active (and therefore have their highest metabolic rates) during daylight hours. In contrast, bats, mice, and many other mammals generally are active and have their highest metabolic rates at night or during the hours of dawn and dusk. Metabolic rates measured when animals are performing a variety of activities give a better idea of the energy costs of everyday life. For most terrestrial animals (both ectotherms and endotherms), the average daily rate of energy consumption is 2-4 times BMR or SMR. Humans in most developed countries have an unusually low average daily metabolic rate of about 1.5 times BMR--an indication of relatively sedentary lifestyles.




