
 Phytochromes function as photoreceptors in many plant responses to light

When we introduced signal transduction in plants earlier in the chapter, we discussed the role of a family of plant pigments called phytochromes in the greening process. Phytochromes regulate many of a plant's responses to light throughout its life from seed to flower. Let's look at a couple of examples.

The Phytochrome Switch and Seed Germination

It was studies of seed germination that led to the discovery of phytochromes. Because of their limited food reserves, the successful sprouting of many types of small seeds, such as lettuce, requires that they germinate only when conditions, especially the light environment, are near optimal. Such seeds often remain dormant for many years until a change in light conditions. For example, the death of a shading tree or the plowing of a field may create a favorable light environment for germination.

In the 1930s, scientists at the U.S. Department of Agriculture determined the action spectrum for light-induced germination of lettuce seeds. They exposed water-swollen seeds to a few minutes of monochromatic (single-colored) light of various wavelengths and then stored the seeds in the dark. After two days, the researchers scored the number of seeds that had germinated under each light regimen. The action spectrum revealed that red light of 660 nm wavelength increases the germination percentage of lettuce seeds the most compared to control seeds that had not been exposed to any light. In marked contrast, far-red light, that is light of wavelengths just near the edge of human visibility (730 nm), inhibits lettuce seed germination compared to the dark controls. What happens when the lettuce seeds are subjected to a flash of red (R) light followed by a flash of far-red (FR) light or, conversely, to FR light followed by R light? The answer is that the last flash of light determines the seeds' response (FIGURE 39.18). In other words, the effects of red and far-red light are reversible.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 39-18. Phytochrome regulation of lettuce seed germination. The control seeds, on the left, were kept in the dark. The various batches of experimental seeds received flashes of light. The bars below the photos indicate the sequences of red and far-red light flashes.

The photoreceptor responsible for these opposing effects of red and far-red light is a phytochrome. It consists of a protein covalently bonded to a nonprotein part that functions as a chromophore, the light-absorbing part of the molecule (FIGURE 39.19). So far, researchers have identified five different phytochromes in Arabidopsis, each with a slightly different protein component.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 39-19. Structure of a phytochrome.

The chromophore of a phytochrome reverts back and forth between two isomeric forms (see Chapter 4 to review isomers). One isomer absorbs red light, and the other absorbs far-red light. The two variations of phytochrome--Pr (red absorbing) and Pfr (far-red absorbing)--are said to be photoreversible: 

This Pr Pfr interconversion acts as a switching mechanism that controls various light-induced events in the life of the plant (FIGURE 39.20). Pfr is the form of phytochrome that triggers many of a plant's developmental responses to light. For example, in the seed germination experiments we just described, Pr in the lettuce seeds that were exposed to red light was converted to Pfr, stimulating the cellular responses that lead to germination. When the red-illuminated seeds were then exposed to far-red light, the Pfr was converted back to Pr, inhibiting the germination response.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 39-20. Phytochrome: a molecular switching mechanism. Absorption of red light causes the bluish Pr to change to the blue-greenish Pfr. Far-red light reverses this conversion. In most cases, it is the Pfr form of the pigment that switches on physiological and developmental responses in the plan

How does phytochrome switching explain light-induced germination in nature? Plants synthesize phytochrome as Pr, and if seeds are kept in the dark the pigment remains almost entirely in the Pr form (FIGURE 39.20). But if the seeds are illuminated with sunlight, the phytochrome is exposed to red light (along with all the other wavelengths in sunlight), and much of the Pr is converted to Pfr. This appearance of Pfr is one of the ways that plants detect sunlight. When seeds are exposed to adequate sunlight for the first time, it is the appearance of Pfr that triggers their germination.

The Phytochrome Switch and Shade Avoidance

The phytochrome system also provides the plant with information about the quality of light. Sunlight includes both red and far-red radiation. Thus, during the day the Pr Pfr photoreversion reaches a dynamic equilibrium, with the ratio of the two phytochrome forms indicating the relative amounts of red and far-red light. This sensing mechanism enables plants to adapt to changes in light conditions. Consider, for example, the "shade-avoidance" response of a tree that requires relatively high light intensity. If other trees in a forest shade this tree, the phytochrome ratio shifts in favor of Pr because the forest canopy screens out more red light than far-red light. (This is because the chlorophyll pigments in the leaves of the canopy absorb red light and allow far-red light to pass.) This shift in the ratio of red to far-red light induces the tree to allocate more of its resources to growing taller. In contrast, direct sunlight increases the proportion of Pfr, which stimulates branching and inhibits vertical growth.

In addition to enabling plants to detect light and distinguish its quality, phytochromes also function in a plant's ability to keep track of the passage of days and seasons. To understand phytochrome's role in these timekeeping processes, we must first examine the clock itself.




