
 Many fungi have a heterokaryotic stage





The nuclei of fungal hyphae and spores of most species are haploid, except for transient diploid stages that form during sexual life cycles. However, some mycelia may become genetically heterogeneous through the fusion of two hyphae that have genetically different nuclei. Such a mycelium is said to be a heterokaryon, meaning "different nuclei." In some cases, the different nuclei stay in separate parts of the same mycelium, which is then a mosaic in terms of genotype and phenotype. In other cases, the different nuclei mingle and may even exchange chromosomes and genes in a process similar to crossing over. This heterokaryon condition has some of the advantages of diploidy; one haploid genome may be able to compensate for harmful mutations in the other nucleus, and vice versa.

In many fungi with sexual life cycles, the union of partners occurs in two distinct stages called plasmogamy and karyogamy (FIGURE 31.3). First comes plasmogamy, the fusion of the two parents' cytoplasm when their mycelia come together. The second stage, karyogamy, is the fusion of the haploid nuclei contributed by the two parents. Plasmogamy and karyogamy may be separated in time by hours, days, or even years or centuries. During the interim, the hybrid mycelium exists as a heterokaryon, its haploid nuclei still separate. In some fungi, the haploid nuclei pair off, two to a cell, one from each parent. Such a mycelium, a special case of a heterokaryon, is said to be dikaryotic, meaning "two nuclei." Without fusing, the two nuclei in each cell divide in tandem as the mycelium grows, until karyogamy finally occurs. In most fungi, the zygotes or transient structures formed by karyogamy are the only diploid stages in the life cycle. Meiosis restores the haploid condition before specialized reproductive structures of the mycelium produce and disperse spores. Of course, the sexual processes of karyogamy and meiosis have generated genetic variation, upon which adaptive evolution depends (see Chapters 13 and 23 to review sex as a mechanism that increases genetic diversity within a population).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 31-3. Generalized life cycle of fungi. Not all fungi use both sexual and asexual modes of reproduction; some fungi reproduce only asexually, while some are entirely sexual.




