
REVIEW: USING THEMES TO CONNECT THE CONCEPTS OF BIOLOGY

In some ways, biology is the most demanding of all sciences, partly because living systems are so complex and partly because biology is a multidisciplinary science that requires a knowledge of chemistry, physics, and mathematics. Modern biology is the decathlon of natural science. And of all the sciences, biology is the most connected to the humanities and social sciences. If you are a biology major or a preprofessional student, you have an opportunity to become a versatile scientist. If you are a physical science major or an engineering student, you will discover in the study of life many applications for what you have learned in your other science courses. If you are a nonscience student enrolled in biology as part of a liberal arts education, you have selected a course in which you can sample many scientific disciplines.

No matter what brings you to biology, you will find the study of life to be challenging and uplifting. Do not let the details of biology spoil a good time. The complexity of life is inspiring, but it can be overwhelming. To help you from "getting lost in the forest because of all the trees," each chapter of this book is constructed from a manageable number of key concepts. The concepts are listed at the beginning of the chapter, are displayed throughout the chapter, and then reappear in the summary at the end of the chapter. The details of a chapter enrich your understanding of the concepts and how they fit together. This introductory chapter is the exception; instead of presenting the key concepts of a particular area of biology, this chapter has introduced themes that cut across all biological fields--ways of thinking about biology (TABLE 1.1). These ten themes, along with the key concepts in each chapter, will provide you with a framework for fitting together the many things you will learn in your multidisciplinary exploration of life--and will encourage you to begin asking important questions of your own.

Table 1-1. Review of Ten Unifying Themes in Biology

ThemeDescriptionWeb/CD Activity*1. Emergent propertiesThe living world has a hierarchical organization, extending from molecules to the biosphere. With each step upward in organizational level, novel properties emerge as a result of interactions among components at the lower levels.Activity1A:
			
			 Emergent Properties: The Levels of Life Card Game2. The cellCells are every organism's basic units of structure and function. The two main types of cells are prokaryotic cells (in bacteria and archaea) and eukaryotic cells (in protists, plants, fungi, and animals).Activity1B:
			
			 Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells3. Heritable informationThe continuity of life depends on the inheritance of biological information in the form of DNA molecules. This genetic information is encoded in the nucleotide sequences of the DNA.Activity1C:
			
			 Heritable Information: DNA4. Structure/functionForm and function are correlated at all levels of biological organization.Activity1D:
			
			 Correlating Structure and Function of Cells5. Interaction with the environmentOrganisms are open systems that exchange materials and energy with their surroundings. An organism's environment includes other organisms as well as nonliving factors.Activity1E:
			
			 Energy Flow and Chemical Cycling6. RegulationFeedback mechanisms regulate biological systems. In some cases, the regulation maintains homeostasis, a relatively steady state for internal factors such as body temperature.Activity1F:
			
			 Regulation: Negative and Positive Feedback7. Unity and diversityBiologists group the diversity of life into three domains: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya. As diverse as life is, we can also find unity, such as a universal genetic code. The more closely related two species are, the more characteristics they share.Activity1G:
			
			 Unity and Diversity: Classification Schemes8. EvolutionEvolution, biology's core theme, explains both the unity and diversity of life. The Darwinian theory of natural selection accounts for adaptation of populations to their environment through the differential reproductive success of varying individuals.Activity1H: 
			
			 Evolution: Sea Horse Camouflage VideoCase Study in the Process of Science: 
			
			 How Do Environmental Changes Affect a Population?9. Scientific inquiryThe process of science includes observation-based discovery and the testing of explanations through the hypothetico-deductive method. Scientific credibility depends on the repeatability of observations and experiments.Case Study in the Process of Science: 
			
			 How Does Acid Precipitation Affect Trees?10. Science, technology, and societyMany technologies are goal-oriented applications of science. The relationships of science and technology to society are now more crucial to understand than ever before.Activity1I:
			
			 Science, Technology, and Society: DDT*Go to the Campbell Biology CD-ROM or website (
			
			 www.campbellbiology.com) to explore an interactive Chapter Review, Activities, Case Studies in the Process of Science, Self-Quizzes, and more.


