
 In terrestrial ecosystems, temperature, moisture, and nutrients limit primary production

Of course, water availability varies more among terrestrial ecosystems than among aquatic ones, but terrestrial ecosystems also vary more in temperature. On a large geographic scale, temperature and moisture are the key factors controlling primary production in ecosystems. Note again in FIGURE 54.3b that tropical rain forests, with their warm, wet conditions that promote plant growth, are the most productive of all terrestrial ecosystems.

On a more local scale, mineral nutrients in the soil can play key roles in limiting primary production in terrestrial ecosystems. Primary production removes soil nutrients, sometimes faster than they are replaced. At some point, a nutrient deficiency may cause plant growth to slow or cease. It is unlikely that all nutrients will be exhausted simultaneously. If a limiting nutrient controls production, adding a nonlimiting nutrient to the soil will not stimulate production. For example, if nitrogen is limiting, then adding phosphorus, even if it, too, is in relatively short supply, will not stimulate production. But if we add nitrogen, this will stimulate plant growth until some other nutrient--say, phosphorus--becomes limiting. In fact, either nitrogen or phosphorus is the soil nutrient that most commonly limits terrestrial production (FIGURE 54.9).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 54-9. Nutrient addition experiments in a Hudson Bay salt marsh. Note that experimental plots receiving phosphorus (P) alone do not outproduce the unfertilized control plots. But adding nitrogen (N) boosts production. Nitrogen is the limiting nutrient, at least until late summer. At this point, phosphorus may become limiting. (What is the basis for this inference?)

Scientific studies relating nutrients to production have practical applications in agriculture. Farmers maximize their crop yields by using fertilizers with the right balance of nutrients for the local soil and the type of crop.




