
 Decomposition connects all trophic levels

The fungi, bacteria, invertebrates, and vertebrates that feed as detritivores often form a major link between the primary producers and the consumers in an ecosystem. In streams, for example, much of the organic material that is used by consumers is supplied by terrestrial plants and enters the ecosystem as leaves and other debris that fall into the water or are washed in by runoff. A crayfish might feed on this plant detritus and associated bacteria and fungi at the bottom of a stream and then be eaten by a fish. In a forest, birds might feed on earthworms that have been feeding on leaf litter and its associated bacteria and fungi in the soil. But even more important than this channeling of resources from producers to consumers is the role that detritivores play in making vital chemical elements available to producers.

The organic material that makes up the living organisms in an ecosystem gets recycled. Detritivores break down (decompose) the organic material and recycle the chemical elements in inorganic forms to abiotic reservoirs such as soil, water, and air. Plants and other producers can then reassimilate these elements into organic matter. All organisms perform some decomposition, breaking down organic molecules during cellular respiration, for example. But an ecosystem's main decomposers are prokaryotes and fungi, which secrete enzymes that digest organic material and then absorb the breakdown products (FIGURE 54.2). Accounting for most of the conversion of organic materials from all trophic levels into inorganic compounds usable by autotrophs, decomposition by prokaryotes and fungi links all trophic levels. Decomposition is the most unappreciated of all ecological processes because prokaryotes and most fungi are not readily visible to the human eye. Yet if decomposition stopped, all life on Earth would cease. The interconnectedness of trophic levels is one of ecosystem ecology's important lessons.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 54-2. Fungi decomposing a log.




