
 Proton pumps play a central role in transport across plant membranes

The most important active transporter in the plasma membranes of plant cells is the proton pump, which hydrolyzes ATP and uses the released energy to pump hydrogen ions (H+) out of the cell. This results in a proton gradient with a higher H+ concentration outside the cell than inside (FIGURE 36.2a). The gradient is a form of stored energy because the hydrogen ions tend to diffuse "downhill" back into the cell. And because the proton pump moves positive charge, in the form of H+, out of the cell, the pump also generates a membrane potential. Membrane potential is a voltage, a separation of opposite charges across a membrane. Proton pumping makes the inside of a plant cell negative in charge relative to the outside. This voltage is called a membrane potential because the charge separation is a form of potential (stored) energy that can be harnessed to perform cellular work.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 36-2. A chemiosmotic model of solute transport in plant cells.

Plant cells use energy stored in the proton gradient and membrane potential to drive the transport of many different solutes. For example, the membrane potential generated by proton pumps contributes to the uptake of potassium ions (K+) by root cells (FIGURE 36.2b). And in the mechanism called cotransport, a transport protein couples the downhill passage of one solute (H+) to the uphill passage of another (NO3-, in the case of FIGURE 36.2c). This "coattail" effect is also responsible for the uptake of the sugar sucrose by plant cells (FIGURE 36.2d). A membrane protein cotransports sucrose with the H+ that is moving down its gradient through the protein.

The role of proton pumps in the transport processes of plant cells is a specific application of the general mechanism called chemiosmosis (see FIGURE 9.15). The key feature of chemiosmosis is a transmembrane proton gradient, which links energy-releasing processes to energy-consuming processes in cells. For example, you learned in Chapters 9 and 10 that mitochondria and chloroplasts use proton gradients generated by electron transport chains (which release energy) to drive ATP synthesis (which consumes energy). The ATP synthases that couple H+ diffusion to ATP synthesis during cellular respiration and photosynthesis function somewhat like the proton pumps in the plasma membranes of plant cells. But in contrast to ATP synthases, proton pumps normally run in reverse, using ATP energy to pump H+ against its gradient. In both cases, proton gradients are the metabolic gears that enable one process to drive another. Chemiosmosis is a unifying principle of cellular energetics.




