
 Alternative mechanisms of carbon fixation have evolved in hot, arid climates

Ever since plants first moved onto land about 425 million years ago, they have been adapting to the problems of terrestrial life, particularly the problem of dehydration. In Chapters 29 and 36, we will consider anatomical adaptations that help plants conserve water. Here we are concerned with metabolic adaptations. The solutions often involve trade-offs. An important example is the compromise between photosynthesis and the prevention of excessive water loss from the plant. The CO2 required for photosynthesis enters a leaf via stomata, the pores through the leaf surface (see FIGURE 10.2). However, stomata are also the main avenues of transpiration, the evaporative loss of water from leaves. On a hot, dry day, most plants close their stomata, a response that conserves water. This response also reduces photosynthetic yield by limiting access to CO2. With stomata even partially closed, CO2 concentrations begin to decrease in the air spaces within the leaf, and the concentration of O2 released from photosynthesis begins to increase. These conditions within the leaf favor a seemingly wasteful process called photorespiration.

Photorespiration: An Evolutionary Relic?

In most plants, initial fixation of carbon occurs via rubisco, the Calvin cycle enzyme that adds CO2 to ribulose bisphosphate. Such plants are called C3 plants because the first organic product of carbon fixation is a three-carbon compound, 3-phosphoglycerate (see FIGURE 10.17). Rice, wheat, and soybeans are among the C3 plants that are important in agriculture. These plants produce less food when their stomata close on hot, dry days. The declining level of CO2 in the leaf starves the Calvin cycle. Making matters worse, rubisco can accept O2 in place of CO2. As O2 concentrations overtake CO2 concentrations within the air spaces of the leaf, rubisco adds O2 to the Calvin cycle instead of CO2. The product splits, and one piece, a two-carbon compound, is exported from the chloroplast. Mitochondria and peroxisomes then break the two-carbon molecule down to CO2. The process is called photorespiration because it occurs in the light (photo) and consumes O2 (respiration). However, unlike normal cellular respiration, photorespiration generates no ATP. And unlike photosynthesis, photorespiration produces no food. In fact, photorespiration decreases photosynthetic output by siphoning organic material from the Calvin cycle.

How can we explain the existence of a metabolic process that seems to be counterproductive to the plant? According to one hypothesis, photorespiration is evolutionary baggage--a metabolic relic from a much earlier time, when the atmosphere had less O2 and more CO2 than it does today. In the ancient atmosphere present when rubisco first evolved, the inability of the enzyme's active site to exclude O2 would have made little difference. The hypothesis speculates that modern rubisco retains some of its ancestral affinity for O2, which is now so concentrated in the atmosphere that a certain amount of photorespiration is inevitable.

It is not known whether photorespiration is beneficial to plants in any way. It is known that in many types of plants--including some of agricultural importance, such as soybeans--photorespiration drains away as much as 50%  of the carbon fixed by the Calvin cycle. As heterotrophs that depend on carbon fixation in chloroplasts for our food, we naturally view photorespiration as wasteful. Indeed, if photorespiration could be reduced in certain plant species without otherwise affecting photosynthetic productivity, crop yields and food supplies would increase.

The environmental conditions that foster photorespiration are hot, dry, bright days--the conditions that cause stomata to close. In certain plant species, alternate modes of carbon fixation that minimize photorespiration--even in hot, arid climates--have evolved. The two most important of these photosynthetic adaptations are C4 photosynthesis and CAM.

C4 Plants

The C4 plants are so named because they preface the Calvin cycle with an alternate mode of carbon fixation that forms a four-carbon compound as its first product. Several thousand species in at least 19 plant families use the C4 pathway. Among the C4 plants important to agriculture are sugarcane and corn, members of the grass family.

A unique leaf anatomy is correlated with the mechanism of C4 photosynthesis (FIGURE 10.18; compare withFIGURE 10.2). In C4 plants, there are two distinct types of photosynthetic cells: bundle-sheath cells and mesophyll cells. Bundle-sheath cells are arranged into tightly packed sheaths around the veins of the leaf. Between the bundle sheath and the leaf surface are the more loosely arranged mesophyll cells. The Calvin cycle is confined to the chloroplasts of the bundle sheath. However, the cycle is preceded by incorporation of CO2 into organic compounds in the mesophyll. The first step is the addition of CO2 to phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) to form the four-carbon product oxaloacetate. The enzyme PEP carboxylase adds CO2 to PEP. Compared to rubisco, PEP carboxylase has a very high affinity for CO2. Therefore, PEP carboxylase can fix CO2 efficiently when rubisco cannot--that is, when it is hot and dry and stomata are partially closed, causing CO2 concentration in the leaf to fall and O2 concentration to rise. After the C4 plant fixes CO2, the mesophyll cells export their four-carbon products (malate in the example shown in FIGURE 10.18) to bundle-sheath cells through plasmodesmata (see FIGURE 7.28). Within the bundle-sheath cells, the four-carbon compounds release CO2, which is reassimilated into organic material by rubisco and the Calvin cycle.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 10-18. C4 leaf anatomy and the C4 pathway. The structure and biochemical functions of the leaves of C4 plants are an evolutionary adaptation to hot, dry climates. This adaptation maintains a CO2 concentration in the bundle sheath that favors photosynthesis over photorespiration.

In effect, the mesophyll cells of a C4 plant pump CO2 into the bundle sheath, keeping the CO2 concentration in the bundle-sheath cells high enough for rubisco to accept carbon dioxide rather than oxygen. In this way, C4 photosynthesis minimizes photorespiration and enhances sugar production. This adaptation is especially advantageous in hot regions with intense sunlight, and it is in such environments that C4 plants evolved and thrive today.

CAM Plants

A second photosynthetic adaptation to arid conditions has evolved in succulent (water-storing) plants (including ice plants), many cacti, pineapples, and representatives of several other plant families. These plants open their stomata during the night and close them during the day, just the reverse of how other plants behave. Closing stomata during the day helps desert plants conserve water, but it also prevents CO2 from entering the leaves. During the night, when their stomata are open, these plants take up CO2 and incorporate it into a variety of organic acids. This mode of carbon fixation is called crassulacean acid metabolism, or CAM, after the plant family Crassulaceae, the succulents in which the process was first discovered. The mesophyll cells of CAM plants store the organic acids they make during the night in their vacuoles until morning, when the stomata close. During the day, when the light reactions can supply ATP and NADPH for the Calvin cycle, CO2 is released from the organic acids made the night before to become incorporated into sugar in the chloroplasts.

Notice in FIGURE 10.19 that the CAM pathway is similar to the C4 pathway in that carbon dioxide is first incorporated into organic intermediates before it enters the Calvin cycle. The difference is that in C4 plants, the initial steps of carbon fixation are separated structurally from the Calvin cycle, whereas in CAM plants, the two steps occur at separate times. (Keep in mind that CAM, C4, and C3 plants all eventually use the Calvin cycle to make sugar from carbon dioxide.)



Click image to enlarge



Fig 10-19. C4 and CAM photosynthesis compared. Both adaptations are characterized by 
			  
		 preliminary incorporation of CO2 into organic acids, followed by 
			  
		 transfer of the CO2 to the Calvin cycle. The C4 and CAM pathways are two evolutionary solutions to the problem of maintaining photosynthesis with stomata partially or completely closed on hot, dry days.




