
 Inductive signals drive differentiation and pattern formation in vertebrates

As embryonic cell division creates cells with different developmental potential, a new possibility arises. Now one group of cells can influence the development of a neighboring group of cells, in the process called induction. At the molecular level, the effect of induction--the response to an inductive signal--is usually the switching on of a set of genes that make the receiving cells differentiate into a specific tissue. You have already learned about the role of induction in vulval development in C. elegans (see FIGURE 21.17). Induction is an essential process in the development of many tissues in other animals as well.

The "Organizer" of Spemann and Mangold

The importance of induction in amphibian development was dramatically demonstrated in the 1920s by German zoologist Hans Spemann and his student Hilde Mangold. In a series of transplantation experiments, they discovered that the dorsal lip of the blastopore in the early gastrula plays a key role in embryonic development, initiating a chain of inductions that results in the formation of the neural tube and other organs. In their most famous experiment, they took a piece of dorsal lip from one embryo and grafted it on the ventral side of a second embryo (FIGURE 47.22). The result was the development of a second notochord and neural tube in the recipient embryo, at the location of the graft. Subsequently, other organs and structures formed, creating a nearly complete second embryo attached to the first. Spemann referred to the dorsal lip of the blastopore as the primary organizer of the embryo because of its early and crucial role in development. (We now know of other "organizers" that act even earlier than the dorsal lip of the blastopore.)



Click image to enlarge



Fig 47-22. The "organizer" of Spemann and Mangold. The dorsal lip of the blastopore in the early gastrula of an amphibian plays a critical role in inducing the development of other parts of the embryo, as Hans Spemann and Hilde Mangold demonstrated with this experiment in 1924.

Developmental biologists are working intensively to identify the molecular basis of induction by Spemann's organizer. An important clue has come from studies of a growth factor called bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP-4). (Bone morphogenetic proteins, a family of related proteins with a variety of developmental roles, derive their name from members of the family that are important in bone formation.) Amphibian BMP-4 is active exclusively in cells on the ventral side of the gastrula. One major function of organizer cells seems to be to inactivate BMP-4 on the dorsal side of the embryo by producing proteins that bind to BMP-4, rendering it unable to signal. Proteins related to BMP-4 and its inhibitors are also found in other animals, including invertebrates such as the fruit fly. The ubiquity of these molecules suggests that they evolved long ago and may participate in the development of many different organisms.

The induction that causes dorsal ectoderm to develop into the neural tube is only one of many cell-cell interactions that transform the three germ layers into organ systems. Many inductions seem to involve a sequence of inductive steps that progressively determine the fate of cells. For example, in the late gastrula of the frog, ectoderm cells destined to become the lenses of the eyes receive inductive signals from the ectodermal cells that will become the neural plate. Additional inductive signals probably come from endodermal cells and mesodermal cells. Finally, inductive signals from the optic cup, an outgrowth of the developing brain, complete the determination of the lens-forming cells.

Pattern Formation in the Vertebrate Limb

Inductive signals play a major role in pattern formation--the development of an animal's spatial organization, the arrangement of organs and tissues in their characteristic places in three-dimensional space. The molecular cues that control pattern formation, called positional information, tell a cell where it is with respect to the animal's body axes and help to determine how the cell and its descendants respond to future molecular signals.

In Chapter 21 we discussed pattern formation in the development of the body segments of Drosophila. For understanding pattern formation in vertebrates, an important model system has been limb development in the chick. The wings and legs of chicks, like all vertebrate limbs, begin as bumps of tissue called limb buds (FIGURE 47.23). Each component of a chick limb, such as a specific bone or muscle, develops with a precise location and orientation relative to three axes: the proximal-distal axis (the "shoulder-to-fingertip" axis), the anterior-posterior axis (the "thumb-to-little finger" axis), and the dorsal-ventral axis (the "knuckle-to-palm" axis). The embryonic cells within a limb bud respond to positional information indicating location along these three axes.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 47-23. Organizer regions in vertebrate limb development.

A limb bud consists of a core of mesodermal tissue covered by a layer of ectoderm. By removing or transplanting different pieces of tissue, researchers have discovered two critical organizer regions in the limb bud, regions with profound effects on the limb's development. These two organizer regions are present in all vertebrate limb buds, including those that will develop into forelimbs (such as wings or arms) and those destined to become hindlimbs. In recent years researchers have established that the cells of these regions secrete proteins that provide key positional information to the other cells of the bud.

One limb-bud organizer region is the apical ectodermal ridge (AER), a thickened area of ectoderm at the tip of the bud (see FIGURE 47.23a). The AER is required for the outgrowth of the limb along the proximal-distal axis and for patterning along this axis. The cells of the AER produce and secrete several proteins of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family. These proteins appear to be the growth signal that promotes limb bud outgrowth. If the AER is surgically removed and beads soaked with FGF are put in its place, a nearly normal limb will develop. The AER and other ectoderm of the limb bud also appear to guide pattern formation along the limb's dorsal-ventral axis. In experiments where the ectoderm of a limb bud is detached from the mesoderm and then replaced with its orientation rotated 180&#176;, the limb elements that form have reversed dorsal-ventral orientation. (This is equivalent to reversing the palm and back of your hand.)

The second major limb-bud organizer region is the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA), located where the posterior side of the bud is attached to the body. The ZPA is necessary for proper pattern formation along the anterior-posterior axis of the limb. Cells nearest the ZPA give rise to posterior structures, such as the digit homologous to our little finger, and cells farthest from the ZPA form anterior structures, such as the avian equivalent of our thumb. A tissue transplantation experiment demonstrating the importance of the ZPA is shown in FIGURE 47.24. Grafting a second ZPA on the anterior side of a limb bud leads to the formation of extra digits, in a mirror-image arrangement.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 47-24. The experimental manipulation of positional information. The zone of polarizing activity (ZPA) issues molecular signals that establish the anterior-posterior axis of a vertebrate limb. In the experiment shown here, a second ZPA was added to the anterior margin of a chick limb bud by transplanting ZPA tissue from another limb bud. Cells near the grafted ZPA, like cells near the host bud's own ZPA, apparently receive positional information indicating "posterior." The pattern that emerges in the developing limb is a mirror image, with an arrangement of digits equivalent to two human hands joined together at the thumbs. In a subsequent experiment, researchers showed that a protein called Sonic hedgehog could substitute for the ZPA cells. Thus Sonic hedgehog functions as a positional cue.

In the ZPA-transplantation experiment, the extra digits develop from the host limb bud and not from the graft, supporting the hypothesis that the grafted ZPA produces some sort of inductive signal. Indeed, researchers have discovered that the cells of the ZPA secrete an important protein growth factor called Sonic hedgehog.* If cells genetically engineered to produce large amounts of Sonic hedgehog are implanted in the anterior region of a normal limb bud, a mirror-image limb results--just as if a ZPA had been grafted there. Evidence from studying the mouse version of Sonic hedgehog suggests that extra toes in mice--and perhaps also in humans--can result from the production of the protein in the wrong part of the limb bud. Proteins very similar to Sonic hedgehog have turned out to be important positional cues in a number of developmental situations, including segment formation in the Drosophila embryo. (The fruit-fly version, called simply Hedgehog, is the product of a segment-polarity gene; see FIGURE 21.13.)

Is Sonic hedgehog a morphogen? Recall from Chapter 21 that a morphogen is a substance that provides positional information in the form of a concentration gradient along an embryonic axis. Although gradients may be involved in the functioning of Sonic hedgehog, the Sonic hedgehog protein itself may not act in a graded manner; instead it may induce the production of something else that does. Researchers are currently investigating this issue.

In any case, we can conclude from experiments like the one in FIGURE 47.24 that pattern formation requires cells to receive and interpret environmental cues that vary from one location to another. These cues, acting together along three axes, tell cells where they are in the three-dimensional realm of a developing organ. In vertebrate limb development, we now know that specific proteins serve as some of these cues. In other words, organizer regions such as the AER and the ZPA function as signaling centers.

What determines whether a limb bud develops into a forelimb or a hindlimb? The cells receiving the signals from the AER and ZPA respond according to their developmental histories. Before the AER or ZPA issues its signals, earlier developmental signals have set up patterns of gene expression distinguishing the future forelimbs from the future hindlimbs. These differences cause the cells of the forelimb and hindlimb limb buds to react differently to the same positional cues.

A hierarchy of gene activations eventually affects the expression of homeobox-containing (Hox) genes in cells of the developing limb. Hox genes seem to be involved in specifying the identity of various regions of the limbs, as well as of the body as a whole (see Chapter 21). Thus, pattern formation is a chain of events involving many steps of signaling and differentiation. Various pathways of pattern formation occur in all the different parts of the developing embryo, eventually producing the final set of differentiated structures in the fully formed animal.




