
 Homeostasis balances an animal's gains versus losses for energy and materials

Like all organisms, animals are open systems that must exchange energy and materials with their environments: Food must be eaten to provide nutrients and chemical energy, oxygen is needed for cellular respiration, CO2 and other metabolic wastes must be removed, heat and water are exchanged, and so forth. These inward and outward flows of energy and materials are frequently rapid and often variable, but as they occur animals also need to maintain reasonably constant internal conditions. This means that rates of gain and loss must be closely matched over time; if they are not, life-threatening imbalances will eventually result. Normally, an animal's inputs of energy and materials only exceed its outputs when there is a net increase in organic matter due to growth or reproduction.

Consider some of the exchanges that occur during ten years in the life of a typical woman weighing 60 kg (shown symbolically in FIGURE 44.2). During that decade she will eat about 2 tons of food, drink 6 to 10 tons of water, use almost 2 tons of oxygen, and metabolically generate more than 7 million kilocalories of heat (enough to warm 90 tons of water from room temperature to the boiling point). The same quantity of materials and heat must be lost from the woman's body in order to maintain its size, temperature, and chemical composition.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 44-2. A partial energy and material bookkeeping for ten years in the life of a young woman. The accounting here is incomplete. For example, uptake of material in the form of food and O2 must be balanced by the loss of material as wastes such as CO2 and organic wastes in feces and urine.

If the woman produces two children (and breast-feeds each for two years) during this ten-year span, she will need to increase the total flow of energy and materials by only 4-5%  compared to her basic maintenance needs. Reproduction is a larger part of the energy and materials flow in many other species--for example, 10-15%  of the annual energy requirement in female mice rearing two litters per year--but regardless of reproductive costs, every animal's survival depends on accurate control of materials and energy exchange.

Because homeostasis requires such a careful balance of materials and energy, it can be viewed as a set of budgets of gains and losses (a heat budget, an energy budget, a water budget, and so on). Most energy and materials budgets are interconnected, with changes in the flux of one component affecting the exchanges of other components. For example, when terrestrial animals exchange gases with the air by breathing, they also lose water by evaporation from the moist lung surfaces. That loss must be compensated by intake (in food or drink) of an equal amount of water. Also, evaporation removes heat from the body (see FIGURE 3.4), and that heat loss must be balanced by the gain of an equivalent amount of heat from some other source.

Let us now see how mechanisms of homeostasis balance an animal's energy and materials budgets, beginning with thermoregulation.




