
 The symptoms of a mineral deficiency depend on the function and mobility of the element

The symptoms of a mineral deficiency depend partly on the function of that nutrient in the plant. For example, a deficiency of magnesium, an ingredient of chlorophyll, causes yellowing of the leaves, or chlorosis (FIGURE 37.3). In some cases, the relationship between a mineral deficiency and its symptoms is less direct. For instance, iron deficiency can cause chlorosis even though chlorophyll contains no iron, because this metal is required as a cofactor in one of the steps of chlorophyll synthesis.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 37-3. Magnesium deficiency in a tomato plant. Yellowing of the leaves (chlorosis) is the result of an inability to synthesize chlorophyll, which contains magnesium.

Mineral deficiency symptoms depend not only on the role of the nutrient in the plant but also on its mobility within the plant. If a nutrient moves about freely from one part of the plant to another, symptoms of a deficiency will show up first in older organs. This is because young, growing tissues have more "drawing power" than old tissues for nutrients that are in short supply. (The mechanism for this preferential routing is the source-to-sink translocation in phloem that you learned about in Chapter 36.) A plant starved for magnesium, for example, will show signs of chlorosis first in its older leaves. Magnesium, which is relatively mobile in the plant, is shunted preferentially to young leaves. In contrast, a deficiency of a nutrient that is relatively immobile within a plant will affect young parts of the plant first. Older tissues may have adequate amounts of the mineral, which they are able to retain during periods of short supply. For example, iron does not move freely within a plant, and a deficiency of iron will cause yellowing of young leaves before any effect on older leaves is visible.

The symptoms of a mineral deficiency are often distinctive enough for a plant physiologist or farmer to diagnose its cause. One way to confirm the diagnosis of a specific deficiency is to analyze the mineral content of the plant and soil. Deficiencies of nitrogen, potassium, and phosphorus are the most common problems. Shortages of micronutrients are less common and tend to be geographically localized because of differences in soil composition. The amount of a micronutrient needed to correct a deficiency is usually quite small. For example, a zinc deficiency in fruit trees can usually be cured by hammering a few zinc nails into each tree trunk. Moderation is important because overdoses of some micronutrients can be toxic to plants.

One way to ensure optimal mineral nutrition is to grow plants hydroponically on nutrient solutions that can be precisely regulated (FIGURE 37.4). Hydroponics is currently practiced commercially, but only on a limited scale, because the requirements for equipment and labor make hydroponic farming relatively expensive compared with growing crops in soil.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 37-4. Hydroponic farming. In this apparatus, a nutrient solution flows over the roots of lettuce growing on a slat. Perhaps astronauts living in a space station will one day grow their vegetables hydroponically, but because of the expense, it is unlikely that this type of farming will relieve hunger here on Earth.

Mineral deficiencies are not limited to terrestrial ecosystems, nor are they unique to plants among photosynthetic organisms. Vast "pastures" of algae in the world's southern oceans are capable of explosive blooms, restrained only by deficiencies of iron in the seawater. In a limited trial in the relatively unproductive seas between Tasmania and Antarctica, researchers demonstrated that dispersing small amounts of iron produces large algal blooms that pull carbon dioxide out of the air. Seeding the ocean with iron might help slow the increase in global carbon dioxide levels that has occurred because of our burning of fossil fuels (and which contributes to global warming by the greenhouse effect; see Chapter 54). Despite the possible benefits, widespread adoption of iron fertilization must be approached warily, given the many uncertain ecological and climatological effects it could have.




