
 Four physical processes account for heat gain or loss

An organism, like any object, exchanges heat by four physical processes called conduction, convection, radiation, and evaporation (FIGURE 44.3). These processes account for the flow of heat within an organism and between an organism and its external environment.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 44-3. Heat exchange between an organism and its environment. Heat is conducted from an object of higher temperature to one of lower temperature.

Conduction is the direct transfer of thermal motion (heat) between molecules of objects in direct contact with each other, as when an animal sits in a pool of cold water or on a hot rock. Heat is always conducted from an object of higher temperature to one of lower temperature, but the rate and amount of heat transfer varies with different materials. Water is 50 to 100 times more effective than air in conducting heat. This is one reason you can rapidly cool your body on a hot day just by standing in cold water.

Convection is the transfer of heat by the movement of air or liquid past a surface, as when a breeze contributes to heat loss from the surface of an animal with dry skin, or circulating blood moves heat from an animal's warm body core to the cooler extremities such as legs. The familiar "wind-chill factor" is an example of how convection compounds the harshness of low temperatures by increasing the rate of heat transfer.

Radiation is the emission of electromagnetic waves by all objects warmer than absolute zero, including an animal's body, the environment, and the sun. Radiation can transfer heat between objects that are not in direct contact, as when an animal absorbs heat radiating from the sun.

Evaporation is the removal of heat from the surface of a liquid that is losing some of its molecules as gas. Evaporation of water from an animal has a strong cooling effect, but it can only occur if the surrounding air is not saturated with water molecules (that is, if the relative humidity is less than 100% ). This is the basis for the common complaint, "The heat is not as bad as the humidity."




