
 Growth involves both cell division and cell expansion

Cell division in meristems, by increasing cell number, increases the potential for growth, but it is cell expansion that accounts for the actual increase in plant mass. The process of plant cell division is described more fully in Chapter 12 (see FIGURE 12.9) and the process of cell elongation in Chapter 39 (see FIGURE 39.7). Here we are more concerned with how these processes contribute to plant form.

The Plane and Symmetry of Cell Division

The plane (direction) of cell division is an important determinant of plant form (FIGURE 35.26a). Imagine a single cell poised to undergo mitosis. If the planes of division of its descendants are parallel to the plane of the first cell division, a single file of cells will be produced (FIGURE 35.26). At the other extreme, if the planes of cell division of the descendant cells are randomly aligned, an unorganized clump of cells will result. The plane of cell division is immensely important in determining form, but so is the symmetry of cell division. Although in earlier chapters we have emphasized the symmetry of chromosomal redistribution during mitosis, the same does not necessarily hold for the cytoplasm. Asymmetrical cell division, in which one daughter cell receives more cytoplasm than the other during mitosis, is fairly common in plant cells and usually signals a key event in development. For example, the formation of guard cells typically involves both an asymmetrical cell division and a change in the plane of the cell division. An epidermal cell divides asymmetrically to form a large cell that will remain an unspecialized epidermal cell and a small cell that will become the guard cell "mother cell." This small mother cell then undergoes another cell division, in a plane perpendicular to the first, to form the guard cells (FIGURE 35.26b).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-26. The plane and symmetry of cell division influence development of form.

The plane in which a cell will divide is determined during late interphase. The first sign of this spatial orientation is a rearrangement of the cytoskeleton. Microtubules in the cortex (outer cytoplasm) of the cell become concentrated into a ring called the preprophase band (FIGURE 35.27). The band disappears before metaphase, but it has already set the future plane of cell division. The "imprint" consists of an ordered array of actin microfilaments that remain after the microtubules of the preprophase band disperse. These microfilaments hold the nucleus in a fixed orientation until the spindle forms, and later they direct movement of the vesicles that produce the cell plate (see FIGURE 12.8b). When the cell finally divides, the walls separating the daughter cells form in the plane defined earlier by the preprophase band.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-27. The preprophase band and the plane of cell division. The location of the preprophase band predicts the plane of cell division. Although the cells dhown on the left and right are similar in shpae. They will divide in different planes. Eachg cell is represented by two light micrographs, one (top) unstained and the other (bottom) stained with a fluorescent dye that binds specifically to microtubules. The stained microtubules form a "halo" (preprophase band) around the nucleus in the outer cytoplasm.

The Orientation of Cell Expansion

Before discussing how cell expansion contributes to plant form, it is useful to consider the difference in cell expansion between plants and animals. Animal cells grow mainly by synthesizing protein-rich cytoplasm, a metabolically expensive process. Growing plant cells also produce additional organic material in their cytoplasm, but the uptake of water typically accounts for about 90%  of a plant cell's expansion. Most of this water is packaged in the large central vacuole, which forms by the coalescence of numerous smaller vacuoles as a cell grows. A plant can grow rapidly and economically because a small amount of cytoplasm can go a long way. Bamboo shoots, for instance, may elongate more than 2 m per week. Rapid extension of shoots and roots increases the exposure to light and soil, an important evolutionary adaptation to the immobile lifestyle of plants.

Plant cells rarely expand equally in all directions. Their greatest expansion is usually oriented along the main axis of the plant. For example, cells near the root tip may elongate to 20 times their original length, with relatively little increase in width. The orientation of cellulose microfibrils in the innermost layers of the cell wall causes this differential growth. The microfibrils cannot stretch much, so the cell expands mainly in the direction perpendicular to the "grain" of the microfibrils, as shown in FIGURE 35.28. A rosette-shaped complex of enzymes built into the plasma membrane synthesizes microfibrils for the cell wall (FIGURE 35.29). The pattern of microfibrils in the wall mirrors the orientation of microtubules located just across the plasma membrane in the cortex of the cell. According to one hypothesis, the microtubules confine the flow of the cellulose-producing enzymes to a specific direction along the membrane. Each enzyme complex advances along one of these channels as the microfibril it extends becomes locked in place by cross-linking to other microfibrils. This specifies the alignment of microfibrils in the wall, which in turn determines the direction of cell expansion.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-28. The orientation of plant cell expansion. Growing plant cells expand mainly through water uptake. In a growing cell, enzymes weaken cross-links in the cell wall, allowing it to expand as water flows in by osmosis. The orientation of cell growth is mainly in the plane perpendicular to the orientation of cellulose microfibrils in the wall. The microfibrils are embedded in a matrix of other (noncellulose) polysaccharides, some of which form the cross-links visible in the micrograph (TEM). Loosening of the wall occurs when hydrogen ions secreted by the cell activate cell wall enzymes that break the cross-links between polymers in the wall. This reduces restraint on the turgid cell, which can take up more water and expand. Small vacuoles, which accumulate most of this water, coalesce and form the cell's central vacuole.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-29. A hypothetical mechanism for how microtubules orient cellulose microfibrils. Cellolose microfibrils are synthesized at the cell surface by complexes of enzymes that can move in the plane of the plasma membrane. According to one hypothesis, microtubules form "banks" that confine the movement of the enzymes to channels of specified direction. Each enzyme complex advances along one of these channels as the microfibril it extends becomes locked in place by cross-linking to other microfibrils.

The Importance of Cortical Microtubules in Plant Growth

Studies of Arabidopsis mutants have confirmed the importance of cortical microtubules in both cell division and expansion. As an example, let's consider what are called fass mutants of Arabidopsis. Fass mutants have cells that are unusually squat and that seemingly align their planes of division in a random fashion. In the roots and stems of these mutants, the ordered cell files and layers normally present are completely absent. Despite these abnormalities, fass mutants do develop into tiny adult plants with all their parts, including flowers, but these organs are compressed longitudinally (FIGURE 35.30).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-30. The fass mutant of Arabidopsis confirms the importance of cortical microtubules to plant growth. The squat body of the fass mutant results from cell division and cell elongation being randomly oriented instead of orienting in the direction of the normal plant axis.

The cortical microtubular organization of fass mutants is abnormal. Although the microtubules involved in chromosome movements and in cell plate deposition are normal, the preprophase bands do not form prior to mitosis (see FIGURE 35.27). In interphase cells, the cortical microtubules are not organized in arrays but are randomly positioned, so the cellulose microfibrils deposited in the cell wall cannot be arranged to determine the direction of the cell's elongation (see FIGURES 35.28 and 35.29). This defect in cortical microtubular organization gives rise to cells that expand in all directions equally and that divide in a haphazard arrangement--hence the stout stature and disorganized tissue arrangement of these mutants.




