
 Eukaryotic cells modify RNA after transcription

Enzymes in the eukaryotic nucleus modify pre-mRNA in various ways before the genetic messages are dispatched to the cytoplasm. During this RNA processing, both ends of the primary transcript are usually altered. In most cases, certain interior sections of the molecule are then cut out and the remaining parts spliced together.

Alteration of mRNA Ends

Each end of a pre-mRNA molecule is modified in a particular way. The 5&#39; end, the end made first during transcription, is im mediately capped off with a modified form of a guanine (G) nucleotide. This 5&#39; cap has at least two important functions. First, it helps protect the mRNA from degradation by hydrolytic enzymes. Second, after the mRNA reaches the cytoplasm, the 5&#39; cap functions as part of an "attach here" sign for ribosomes. The other end of an mRNA molecule, the 3&#39; end, is also modified before the message exits the nucleus. At the 3&#39; end, an enzyme makes a poly(A) tail consisting of some 50 to 250 adenine nu cleotides. Like the 5&#39; cap, the poly(A) tail inhibits degradation of the RNA and probably helps ribosomes attach to it. The poly(A) tail also seems to facilitate the export of mRNA from the nucleus. FIGURE 17.8 shows a eukaryotic mRNA molecule with cap and tail; it also shows the nontranslated leader and trailer segments of RNA to which they are attached.

Split Genes and RNA Splicing

The most remarkable stage of RNA processing in the eukaryotic nucleus is the removal of a large portion of the RNA molecule that is initially synthesized--a cut-and-paste job called RNA splicing (FIGURE 17.9, p. 312). The average length of a transcription unit along a eukaryotic DNA molecule is about 8,000 nucleotides, so the primary RNA transcript is also that long. But it takes only about 1,200 nucleotides to code for an average-sized protein of 400 amino acids. (Remember, each amino acid is encoded by a triplet of nucleotides.) This means that most eukaryotic genes and their RNA transcripts have long noncoding stretches of nucleotides, regions that are not translated. Even more surprising is that most of these noncoding sequences are interspersed between coding segments of the gene and thus between coding segments of the pre-mRNA. In other words, the sequence of DNA nucleotides that codes for a eukaryotic polypeptide is not continuous. The noncoding segments of nucleic acid that lie between coding regions are called intervening sequences, or introns for short. The other regions are called exons, because they are eventually expressed, usually by being translated into amino acid sequences. (Exceptions include the leader and trailer portions of the exons at the ends of the RNA. Because of these exceptions, you may find it helpful to think of exons as DNA that exits the nucleus.) The terms intron and exon are used for both DNA and RNA. Richard Roberts and Phillip Sharp, who independently found evidence of "split genes" in 1977, shared a Nobel Prize in 1993 for this discovery.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 17-9. RNA processing: RNA splicing. The RNA molecule shown here codes for b globin, one of the polypeptides of hemoglobin. The numbers under the RNA refer to codons; b globin is 146 amino acids long. The b globin gene and its pre-mRNA transcript have three regions, called exons, that consist mostly of coding sequences; exons are separated by noncoding regions, called introns. During RNA processing, the introns are excised and the exons are spliced together.

In making a primary transcript from a gene, RNA polymerase transcribes both introns and exons from the DNA, but the mRNA molecule that enters the cytoplasm is an abridged version. The introns are cut out from the molecule and the exons joined together to form an mRNA molecule with a continuous coding sequence. This is the process of RNA splicing.

How is pre-mRNA splicing carried out? Researchers have learned that the signals for RNA splicing are short nucleotide sequences at the ends of introns. Particles called small nuclear ribonucleoproteins, or snRNPs (pronounced "snurps"), recognize these splice sites. As the name implies, snRNPs are located in the cell nucleus and are composed of RNA and protein molecules. The RNA in a snRNP particle is called a small nuclear RNA (snRNA); each molecule is about 150 nucleotides long. Several different snRNPs join with additional proteins to form an even larger assembly called a spliceosome, which is almost as big as a ribosome. The spliceosome interacts with the splice sites at the ends of an intron. It cuts at specific points to release the intron, then immediately joins together the two exons that flanked the intron (FIGURE 17.10). There is strong evidence that snRNA plays a role in the catalytic process as well as in spliceosome assembly and splice site recognition. The idea of a catalytic role for snRNA arose from the discovery of ribozymes, RNA molecules that function as enzymes.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 17-10. The roles of snRNPs and spliceosomes in mRNA splicing. The diagram shows only a portion of the RNA transcript; additional introns and exons lie downstream from the ones pictured here. 
			  
		 Pre-mRNA containing exons and introns combines with small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs) and other proteins to form a molecular complex called a spliceosome. 
			  
		 Within the spliceosome, snRNA base-pairs with nucleotides at the ends of the intron. 
			  
		 The RNA transcript is cut to release the intron, and the exons are spliced together. The spliceosome then comes apart, releasing mRNA, which now contains only exons.

Ribozymes

Like pre-mRNA, other kinds of primary transcripts may also be spliced, but by diverse mechanisms that do not involve spliceosomes. However, as in the mRNA case, RNA is often involved in catalyzing the reactions. In a few cases, the splicing occurs completely without proteins or even extra RNA molecules: The intron RNA catalyzes its own excision! For example, in the protozoan Tetrahymena, self-splicing occurs in the production of an RNA component of the organism's ribosomes (ribosomal RNA). Like enzymes, ribozymes function as catalysts. The discovery of ribozymes rendered obsolete the statement "All biological catalysts are proteins."

The Functional and Evolutionary Importance of Introns

What are the biological functions of introns and RNA splicing? One idea is that introns play regulatory roles in the cell. At least some introns contain sequences that control gene activity in some way, and the splicing process itself may help regulate the passage of mRNA from nucleus to cytoplasm.

One established benefit of split genes is to enable a single gene to encode more than one kind of polypeptide. A number of genes are known to give rise to two or more different polypeptides, depending on which segments are treated as exons during RNA processing; this is called alternative RNA splicing (see FIGURE 19.11). The fruit fly provides an interesting example: Sex differences in this animal are largely due to differences in how males and females splice the RNA transcribed from certain genes. Early results from the Human Genome Project (discussed in Chapter 20) suggest that alternative RNA splicing may be one reason humans can get along with a relatively small number of genes--only about twice as many as a fruit fly.

Split genes may also facilitate the evolution of new and potentially useful proteins. Proteins often have a modular architecture consisting of discrete structural and functional regions called domains. One domain of an enzymatic protein, for instance, might include the active site, while another might attach the protein to a cellular membrane. In many cases, different exons code for the different domains of a protein (FIGURE 17.11). Introns increase the probability of potentially beneficial crossing over between genes. Simply by providing more places where crossing over can occur (and without interfering with coding sequences), introns increase the opportunity for recombination between two alleles of a gene and raise the probability that a crossover will switch one version of an exon for another version found on the homologous chromosome. We can also imagine the occasional mixing and matching of exons between completely different (nonallelic) genes. Exon shuffling of either sort could lead to new proteins with novel combinations of functions.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 17-11. Correspondence between exons and protein domains. In a number of genes, different exons encode separate domains of the protein product. Each domain, an independently folding part of the protein, performs a different function. Such correspondence between exons and domains suggests that new proteins can evolve by exon shuffling among genes.




