
 The geographic distribution of terrestrial biomes is based mainly on regional variations in climate

All the abiotic factors we covered earlier in the chapter, but especially climate, are important in determining why a particular terrestrial biome is found in a certain area. Because there are latitudinal patterns of climate over Earth's surface (see FIGURES 50.11-50.13), there are also latitudinal patterns of biome distribution. For example, coniferous forests extend in a broad band across North America, Europe, and Asia (FIGURE 50.24).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 50-24. The distribution of major terrestrial biomes. Although terrestrial biomes are mapped here with sharp boundaries, biomes actually grade into one another, sometimes over relatively large areas. The tropics are the low-latitude regions bordered by the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn.

Terrestrial biomes are often named for major physical or climatic features and for their predominant vegetation. For example, temperate grasslands are dominated by various grass species and are generally found in middle latitudes, where the climate is more moderate than in the tropics or polar regions. Each biome is also characterized by microorganisms, fungi, and animals adapted to that particular environment. Temperate grasslands, for example, are more likely than forests to be populated by large grazing mammals.

Vertical stratification is an important feature of terrestrial biomes, and the shapes and sizes of plants largely define the layering. For example, in many forests, the layers consist of the upper canopy, then the low-tree stratum, the shrub understory, the ground layer of herbaceous plants, the forest floor (litter layer), and finally the root layer. Other (nonforest) biomes have similar, though usually less pronounced vertical strata. For instance, grasslands have a canopy formed by an herbaceous layer of grass species, a litter layer, and a root layer. The root layer in arctic tundra is shallower than in most other biomes because a permanently frozen stratum called permafrost underlies it.

Vertical stratification of a biome's vegetation provides many different habitats for animals, which often occupy well-defined feeding groups, from the insectivorous and carnivorous birds and bats that feed above canopies to the small mammals, numerous worms, and arthropods that forage the litter and root layers for food.

Terrestrial biomes usually grade into each other, without sharp boundaries. The area of intergradation may be wide or narrow and is called an ecotone.

The actual species composition of any one kind of biome varies from one location to another. For instance, in the northern coniferous forest (taiga) of North America, red spruce is common in the east but does not occur in most other areas, where black spruce and white spruce are abundant. Although the vegetation of African deserts superficially resembles that of North American deserts, the plants are in different families. Such "ecological equivalents" can arise because of convergent evolution (see Chapter 25).

Biomes are dynamic, and natural disturbance rather than stability tends to be the rule. As a result of disturbance, biomes usually exhibit extensive patchiness, with several communities represented in any particular area. Hurricanes create openings in tropical and temperate forests. In northern coniferous forests, old trees die and fall over, or snowfall may break branches and small trees, producing openings or gaps that allow deciduous species, such as aspen and birch, to grow. In many biomes, even the dominant plants depend on periodic disturbance. For example, fire is an integral component of grasslands, savannas, chaparral, and many coniferous forests. Before agricultural and urban development, much of the southeastern United States was dominated by a single conifer species, the longleaf pine. Without periodic burning, deciduous trees tended to replace the pines. Forest managers now use fire as a tool to help maintain many coniferous forests.

In many biomes today, extensive human activities have radically altered the natural patterns of periodic physical disturbance. Most of the eastern United States, for example, is classified as temperate deciduous forest, but human activity has eliminated all but a tiny percentage of the original forest. Fires, which used to be part of life on the Great Plains, are now controlled for the sake of agricultural land use. Humans have altered much of Earth's surface, replacing original biomes with urban and agricultural ones.

FIGURE 50.25, on pages 1113-1117, surveys the major terrestrial biomes, beginning near the equator and moving toward the poles.

a.

b.

c.

d.

e.

f.

g.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 50-25. Examples of terrestrial biomes. (a) Tropical forest. The photograph shows a tropical rain forest in Costa Rica. Tropical rain forests have pronounced vertical stratification. Trees in the canopy make up the topmost stratum. The canopy is often closed, so that little light reaches the ground below. When an opening does occur, perhaps because of a fallen tree, other trees and large woody vines grow rapidly, competing for light and space as they fill the gap. Many of the trees are covered with epiphytes (plants that grow on other plants rather than in soil), such as orchids and bromeliads. Rainfall, which varies from region to region in the tropics, is the prime determinant of the vegetation growing in an area. In lowland areas that have a prolonged dry season or scarce rainfall at any time, tropical dry forests predominate. The plants found there are a mixture of thorny shrubs and trees and succulents. In regions with distinct wet and dry seasons, tropical deciduous trees are common. (b) Savanna. This Kenyan savanna is a showcase of large herbivores and their predators. Actually, the dominant herbivores here and in other savannas are insects, especially ants and termites. Grasses and scattered trees are the dominant plants. Fire is an important abiotic component, and the dominant plant species are fire adapted. The luxuriant growth of grasses and forbs (small broadleaf plants) during the rainy season provides a rich food source for animals. However, large grazing mammals must migrate to greener pastures and scattered watering holes during regular periods of seasonal drought. (c) Desert. Sparse rainfall (less than 30 cm per year) largely determines that an area will be a desert. Some deserts have soil surface temperatures above 60&#176;C during the day. Other deserts, such as those west of the Rocky Mountains and in central Asia, are relatively cold. The Sonoran Desert of southern Arizona (shown here) is characterized by giant saguaro cacti and deeply rooted shrubs. Evolutionary adaptations of desert plants and animals include a remarkable array of mechanisms that store water. The "pleated" structure of saguaro cacti enables the plants to expand when they absorb water during wet periods. Some desert mice never drink, deriving all their water from the metabolic breakdown of the seeds they eat. Many desert plants also rely on CAM photosynthesis, a metabolic adaptation that conserves water in this arid environment (see Chapter 10). Protective adaptations that deter feeding by mammals and insects, such as spines on cacti and poisons in the leaves of shrubs, are also common in desert plants. (d) Chaparral. Dense, spiny, evergreen shrubs dominate chaparral biomes, midlatitude coastal areas with mild, rainy winters and long, hot, dry summers. Plants of the chaparral, such as those in this California scrubland, are adapted to and dependent on periodic fires. The dry, woody shrubs are frequently ignited by lightning and by careless human activities, creating summer and autumn brushfires in the densely populated canyons of southern California and elsewhere. Some of the shrubs produce seeds that will germinate only after a hot fire. Food reserves stored in their fire-resistant roots enable them to resprout quickly and use nutrients released by fires. (e) Temperate grassland. The veldts of South Africa, the puszta of Hungary, the pampas of Argentina and Uruguay, the steppes of Russia, and the plains and prairies of central North America are all temperate grasslands. The key to the persistence of grasslands is seasonal drought, occasional fires, and grazing by large mammals, all of which prevent establishment of woody shrubs and trees. Temperate grasslands, such as the tallgrass prairie in Kansas (shown here), once covered much of central North America. Because grassland soil is both deep and rich in nutrients, these habitats provide fertile land for agriculture. Most grassland in the United States has been converted to farmland, and very little natural prairie exists today. (f) Temperate deciduous forest. Dense stands of deciduous trees are the trademark of temperate deciduous forests, such as this one in Great Smoky Mountains National Park in North Carolina. Temperate deciduous forests occur throughout midlatitudes where there is sufficient moisture to support the growth of large trees. More open than rain forests and not as tall, a mature temperate deciduous forest has distinct vertical layers, including one or two strata of trees, an understory of shrubs, and an herbaceous stratum. Deciduous forest trees drop their leaves before winter, when temperatures are too low for effective photosynthesis and water lost through transpiration is not easily replaced from frozen soil. Many temperate deciduous forest mammals also enter a dormant winter state called hibernation, and some bird species migrate to warmer climates. Virtually all the original deciduous forests in North America were destroyed by logging and land clearing for agriculture and urban development. In contrast to drier biomes, these forests tend to recover after disturbance, and today we see deciduous trees dominating undeveloped areas over much of their former range. (g) Coniferous forest. Cone-bearing trees, such as pine, spruce, fir, and hemlock, dominate coniferous forests. Coastal coniferous forests of the U.S. Pacific Northwest, such as the one shown here in Olympic National Park in western Washington, are actually temperate rain forests. Warm, moist air from the Pacific Ocean supports these unique communities, which like most coniferous forests are dominated by one or a few tree species. Extending in a broad band across northern North America and Eurasia to the southern border of the arctic tundra, the northern coniferous forest, or taiga, is the largest terrestrial biome on Earth (see FIGURE 50.24). Taiga receives heavy snowfall during winter. The conical shape of many conifers prevents too much snow from accumulating on and breaking their branches. Coniferous forests are being logged at an alarming rate, and the old-growth stands of these trees may soon disappear. (h) Tundra. Permafrost (permanently frozen subsoil), bitterly cold temperatures, and high winds are responsible for the absence of trees and other tall plants in this arctic tundra in central Alaska (photographed in autumn). Although the arctic tundra receives very little annual rainfall (see FIGURE 50.10), water cannot penetrate the underlying permafrost and accumulates in pools on the shallow topsoil during the short summer. Tundra covers expansive areas of the Arctic, amounting to 20%  of Earth's land surface. High winds and cold temperatures create similar plant communities, called alpine tundra, on very high mountaintops at all latitudes, including the tropics.




