
Chapter 2: THE CHEMICAL CONTEXT OF LIFE

CHEMICAL ELEMENTS AND COMPOUNDS

   Matter consists of chemical elements in pure form and in combinations called compounds

   Life requires about 25 chemical elements



ATOMS AND MOLECULES

   Atomic structure determines the behavior of an element

   Atoms combine by chemical bonding to form molecules

   Weak chemical bonds play important roles in the chemistry of life

   A molecule's biological function is related to its shape

   Chemical reactions make and break chemical bonds

Like other animals, beetles have evolved structures and mechanisms that defend them from attack. As chemical ecologist Thomas Eisner described in the interview opening this unit, the soil-dwelling bombardier beetle has a particularly effective mechanism for dealing with the ants that plague it. Upon detecting an ant on its body, this beetle ejects a spray of boiling hot liquid from glands in its abdomen, aiming the spray directly at the ant. (In the photo on this page, the beetle aims its spray at Dr. Eisner's forceps.) The spray contains irritating chemicals that are generated at the moment of ejection by the explosive reaction of two sets of chemicals stored separately in the glands. The reaction produces heat and an audible pop.

Research on the bombardier beetle has involved chemistry, physics, and engineering, as well as biology. This is not surprising, for unlike a college catalog of courses, nature is not neatly packaged into the individual natural sciences. Biologists specialize in the study of life, but organisms and the world they live in are natural systems to which basic concepts of chemistry and physics apply. Biology is a multidisciplinary science.

This unit of chapters introduces key concepts of chemistry that will apply throughout our study of life. We will make many connections to the themes introduced in Chapter 1. One of those themes is the organization of life into a hierarchy of structural levels (FIGURE 2.1), with additional properties emerging at each successive level. In this unit, we will see how the theme of emergent properties applies to the lowest levels of biological organization--to the ordering of atoms into molecules and to the interactions of those molecules within cells. Somewhere in the transition from molecules to cells, we will cross the blurry boundary between nonlife and life.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 2-1. The hierarchy of biological order from atom to organism.




