
 Evidence that chloroplasts split water molecules enabled researchers to track atoms through photosynthesis

Scientists have tried for centuries to piece together the process by which plants make food. Although some of the steps are still not completely understood, the overall photosynthetic equation has been known since the 1800s: In the presence of light, the green parts of plants produce organic compounds and oxygen from carbon dioxide and water. Using molecular formulas, we can summarize photosynthesis with this chemical equation: 
The carbohydrate C6H12O6 is glucose.* Water appears on both sides of the equation because 12 molecules are consumed and 6 molecules are newly formed during photosynthesis. We can simplify the equation by indicating only the net consumption of water: 
Writing the equation in this form, we can see that the overall chemical change during photosynthesis is the reverse of the one that occurs during cellular respiration. Both of these metabolic processes occur in plant cells. However, as you will soon learn, plants do not make food by simply reversing the steps of respiration.

Now let's divide the photosynthetic equation by 6 to put it in its simplest possible form: 
Here, CH2O is not an actual sugar but represents the general formula for a carbohydrate. In other words, we are imagining the synthesis of a sugar molecule one carbon at a time. Six repetitions would produce a glucose molecule. Let's now use this simplified formula to see how researchers tracked the chemical elements (C, H, and O) from the reactants of photosynthesis to the products.

The Splitting of Water

One of the first clues to the mechanism of photosynthesis came from the discovery that the oxygen given off by plants is derived from water and not from carbon dioxide. The chloroplast splits water into hydrogen and oxygen. Before this discovery, the prevailing hypothesis was that photosynthesis split carbon dioxide and then added water to the carbon. 
This hypothesis predicted that the O2 released during photosynthesis came from CO2. This idea was challenged in the 1930s by C. B. van Niel of Stanford University. Van Niel was investigating photosynthesis in bacteria that make their carbohydrate from CO2 but do not release O2. Van Niel concluded that, at least in these bacteria, CO2 is not split into carbon and oxygen. One group of bacteria used hydrogen sulfide (H2S) rather than water for photosynthesis, forming yellow globules of sulfur as a waste product (these globules are visible in FIGURE 10.1e). Here is the chemical equation: 
Van Niel reasoned that the bacteria split H2S and used the hydrogen to make sugar. He then generalized that idea, proposing that all photosynthetic organisms require a hydrogen source, but that the source varies: 
Thus, van Niel hypothesized that plants split water as a source of hydrogen, releasing oxygen as a by-product.

Nearly 20 years later, scientists confirmed van Niel's hypothesis by using oxygen-18 (18O), a heavy isotope, as a tracer to follow the fate of oxygen atoms during photosynthesis. The O2 that came from plants was labeled with 18O only if water was the source of the tracer. If the 18O was introduced to the plant in the form of CO2, the label did not turn up in the released O2. In the following summary of these experiments, red denotes labeled atoms of oxygen: 
The most important result of the shuffling of atoms during photosynthesis is the extraction of hydrogen from water and its incorporation into sugar. The waste product of photosynthesis, O2, restores the atmospheric oxygen consumed during cellular respiration. FIGURE 10.3 shows the fates of all atoms in photosynthesis.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 10-3. Tracking atoms through photosynthesis.

Photosynthesis as a Redox Process

Let's briefly contrast photosynthesis with cellular respiration. During respiration, energy is released from sugar when electrons associated with hydrogen are transported by carriers to oxygen, forming water as a by-product. The electrons lose potential energy as they are pulled down the electron transport chain to electronegative oxygen, and the mitochondrion uses the energy to synthesize ATP. Photosynthesis, also a redox process, reverses the direction of electron flow. Water is split, and electrons are transferred along with hydrogen ions from the water to carbon dioxide, reducing it to sugar. The electrons increase in potential energy as they move from water to sugar. The required energy boost is provided by light.




