
 The mitotic spindle distributes chromosomes to daughter cells: a closer look

Many of the events of mitosis depend on the mitotic spindle, which begins to form in the cytoplasm during prophase. This structure consists of fibers made of microtubules and associated proteins. While the mitotic spindle assembles, the microtubules of the cytoskeleton partially disassemble, probably providing the material used to construct the spindle. The spindle microtubules elongate by incorporating more subunits of the protein tubulin (see TABLE 7.2).

The assembly of spindle microtubules starts in the centrosome, a nonmembranous organelle that functions throughout the cell cycle to organize the cell's microtubules (it is also called the microtubule-organizing center). In animal cells, a pair of centrioles is located at the center of the centrosome, but the centrioles are not essential for cell division. In fact, the centrosomes of most plants lack centrioles, and if a researcher destroys the centrioles of an animal cell with a laser micro beam, a spindle nevertheless forms during mitosis.

During interphase, the single centrosome replicates to form two centrosomes (see FIGURE 12.5). As mitosis starts, the two centrosomes are located near the nucleus; they then move apart from each other during prophase and prometaphase, as spindle microtubules grow out from them. By the end of prometaphase, the two centrosomes, referred to as spindle poles in this context, are at opposite poles of the cell.

Each of the two joined chromatids of a chromosome has a kinetochore, a structure of proteins and specific sections of chromosomal DNA at the centromere. The chromosome's two kinetochores face in opposite directions. During prometaphase, some of the spindle microtubules attach to the kinetochores. When one of a chromosome's kinetochores is "captured" by microtubules, the chromosome begins to move toward the pole from which those microtubules come. However, this movement is checked as soon as microtubules from the opposite pole attach to the other kinetochore. What happens next is like a tug-of-war that ends in a draw. The chromosome moves first in one direction, then the other, back and forth, finally settling midway between the two poles of the cell (FIGURE 12.6). Meanwhile, microtubules that do not attach to kinetochores interact with nonkinetochore microtubules from the opposite pole of the cell. At metaphase, these microtubules overlap, and the centromeres of all the duplicated chromosomes are on a plane midway between the two poles. This plane is called the metaphase plate of the cell. The spindle is now complete.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 12-6. The mitotic spindle at metaphase.

Let's now see how the structure of the completed spindle correlates with its function during anaphase. Anaphase commences suddenly when proteins holding together the sister chromatids of each chromosome are inactivated. Now that the chromatids are separate, full-fledged chromosomes, they move toward opposite poles of the cell. How do the kinetochore microtubules function in this poleward movement of chromosomes? Experimental evidence supports the hypothesis that kinetochores are equipped with motor proteins that "walk" a chromosome along the attached microtubules toward the nearest pole. Meanwhile, the microtubules shorten by depolymerizing at their kinetochore ends (FIGURE 12.7). (To review how motor proteins move an object along a microtubule, see FIGURE 7.21b.)



Click image to enlarge



Fig 12-7. Testing a hypothesis for chromosome migration during anaphase.

What is the function of the nonkinetochore microtubules? In a dividing animal cell, these microtubules are responsible for elongating the whole cell during anaphase (see FIGURE 12.5). Nonkinetochore microtubules interdigitate across the metaphase plate, and during anaphase ones originating from opposite spindle poles move past each other toward their poles. The mechanism seems to be similar to the one that slides neighboring microtubules in a flagellum: Motor proteins attached to the nonkinetochore microtubules drive them past one another, using energy from ATP (see FIGURE 7.21a). At the same time, the nonkinetochore microtubules lengthen by the addition of tubulin subunits to their ends.

At the end of anaphase, duplicate sets of chromosomes have arrived at opposite poles of the elongated parent cell. Nuclei re-form during telophase. Cytokinesis generally begins during this last stage of mitosis.




