
 Invertebrate regulatory systems clearly illustrate endocrine and nervous system interactions

Invertebrate animals have a variety of hormones that function in homeostasis--by regulating water balance, for instance. However, the hormones that have been most extensively studied function in reproduction and development. In a hydra, for example, one hormone stimulates growth and budding (asexual reproduction) but prevents sexual reproduction. In more complex invertebrates the endocrine and nervous systems are generally integrated in the control of reproduction and development. One well-studied example of nerve and hormone interaction in controlling both reproductive functions and behavior involves the hormone that regulates egg laying in the mollusk Aplysia. Secreted by specialized neurons, this hormone stimulates the laying of thousands of eggs and also inhibits feeding and locomotion, activities that interfere with reproduction.

All groups of arthropods have extensive endocrine systems. Crustaceans, for example, have hormones for growth and reproduction, water balance, movement of pigments in the integument and in the eyes, and the regulation of metabolism. Having exoskeletons that cannot stretch, crustaceans and insects appear to grow in spurts, shedding the old and secreting a new exoskeleton with each molt. Further, most insects acquire their adult characteristics in a single, terminal molt. In insects and crustaceans (and most likely in all arthropods with exoskeletons), molting is triggered by a hormone called ecdysone. In insects, ecdysone is secreted from a pair of endocrine glands, called the prothoracic glands, just behind the head (FIGURE 45.2). Besides stimulating the molt, ecdyone also favors the development of adult characteristics, as in the change from a caterpillar to a butterfly. In insects, ecdysone production is itself controlled by a second hormone, called brain hormone (BH). Produced by neurosecretory cells in the brain, this hormone promotes development by stimulating the prothoracic glands to secrete ecdysone.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 45-2. Hormonal regulation of insect development. Most insects go through a series of larval stages, with each molt (shedding of the old exoskeleton) leading to a larger larva. Molting of the final larval stage gives rise to a pupa, in which metamorphosis produces the adult form of the insect. Hormones control the progression of stages as shown here.

Brain hormone and ecdysone are balanced by juvenile hormone (JH), the third hormone in this system. JH is secreted by a pair of small glands just behind the brain, the corpora allata. Juvenile hormone promotes the retention of larval (juvenile) characteristics. In the presence of a relatively high concentration of juvenile hormone, ecdysone can still stimulate molting, but the product is a larger larva. Only when the level of juvenile hormone wanes can ecdysone-induced molting produce a developmental stage called a pupa. Within the pupa, metamorphosis replaces larval anatomy with the insect's adult form. (Synthetic versions of JH are now being used as insecticides to prevent insects from maturing into reproducing adults.)

In all these invertebrate examples, we see the importance of the nervous system to hormone activity. We will see similar interactions as we survey vertebrate endocrine systems.




