
 The Golgi apparatus finishes, sorts, and ships cell products

After leaving the ER, many transport vesicles travel to the Golgi apparatus. We can think of the Golgi as a center of manufacturing, warehousing, sorting, and shipping. Here, products of the ER are modified and stored and then sent to other destinations. Not surprisingly, the Golgi apparatus is especially extensive in cells specialized for secretion.

The Golgi apparatus consists of flattened membranous sacs--cisternae--looking like a stack of pita bread (FIGURE 7.12). A cell may have several or even hundreds of these stacks. The membrane of each cisterna in a stack separates its internal space from the cytosol. Vesicles concentrated in the vicinity of the Golgi apparatus are engaged in the transfer of material between the Golgi and other structures.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 7-12. The Golgi apparatus. The Golgi apparatus consists of stacks of flattened sacs, or cisternae, which, unlike ER cisternae, are not physically connected. (The drawing is a cutaway view.) A Golgi stack receives and dispatches transport vesicles and the products they contain. Materials received from the ER are modified and stored in the Golgi and eventually shipped to the cell surface or other destinations. Note the vesicles joining and leaving the cisternae. A Golgi stack has a structural and functional polarity, with a cis face that receives vesicles containing ER products and a trans face that dispatches vesicles (at right, TEM).

A Golgi stack has a distinct polarity, with the membranes of cisternae at opposite ends of the stack differing in thickness and molecular composition. The two poles of a Golgi stack are referred to as the cis face and the trans face; these act, respectively, as the receiving and shipping departments of the Golgi apparatus. The cis face is usually located near the ER. Transport vesicles move material from the ER to the Golgi. A vesicle that buds from the ER will add its membrane and the contents of its lumen (cavity) to the cis face by fusing with a Golgi membrane. The trans face gives rise to vesicles, which pinch off and travel to other sites.

Products of the ER are usually modified during their transit from the cis pole to the trans pole of the Golgi. Proteins and phospholipids of membranes may be altered. For example, various Golgi enzymes modify the oligosaccharide portions of glycoproteins. Oligosaccharides are first added to proteins in the rough ER, often during the process of polypeptide synthesis. The resulting glycoprotein is then modified as it passes through the rest of the ER and the Golgi. The Golgi removes some sugar monomers and substitutes others, producing a large variety of oligosaccharides.

In addition to its finishing work, the Golgi apparatus manufactures certain macromolecules by itself. Many polysaccharides secreted by cells are Golgi products, including pectins and certain other noncellulose polysaccharides made by plant cells and incorporated along with cellulose into their cell walls. (Cellulose is made by enzymes located within the plasma membrane, which directly deposit this polysaccharide on the outside surface.) Golgi products that will be secreted depart from the trans face of the Golgi inside transport vesicles that eventually fuse with the plasma membrane.

The Golgi manufactures and refines its products in stages, with different cisternae between the cis and trans ends containing unique teams of enzymes. Products in various stages of processing seem to be transferred from one cisterna to the next by vesicles.

Before a Golgi stack dispatches its products by budding vesicles from the trans face, it sorts these products and targets them for various parts of the cell. Molecular identification tags, such as phosphate groups that have been added to the Golgi products, aid in sorting. Finally, transport vesicles budded from the Golgi may have external molecules on their membranes that recognize "docking sites" on the surface of specific organelles or on the plasma membrane.




