
 The ovule develops into a seed containing an embryo and a supply of nutrients

After double fertilization, the ovule develops into a seed, and the ovary develops into a fruit enclosing the seed(s). As the embryo develops from the zygote, the seed stockpiles proteins, oils, and starch. This is why seeds are such major nutrient sinks (see Chapter 36). Initially, these nutrients are stored in the endosperm, but later in seed development in many species, the storage function of the endosperm is more or less taken over by the swelling storage leaves (cotyledons) of the embryo itself.

Endosperm Development

Endosperm development usually precedes embryo development. After double fertilization, the triploid nucleus of the ovule's central cell divides, forming a multinucleate "supercell" having a milky consistency. This liquid mass, the endosperm, becomes multicellular when cytokinesis partitions the cytoplasm by forming membranes between the nuclei. Eventually, these "naked" cells produce cell walls, and the endosperm becomes solid. Coconut "milk" is an example of liquid endosperm; coconut "meat" is an example of solid endosperm.

The endosperm is rich in nutrients, which it provides to the developing embryo. In most monocots and some dicots, the endosperm also stores nutrients that can be used by the seedling after germination. In many dicots (including bean seeds), the food reserves of the endosperm are completely exported to the cotyledons (seed leaves) before the seed completes its development, and consequently the mature seed lacks endosperm.

Embryo Development

The first mitotic division of the zygote is transverse, splitting the fertilized egg into a basal cell and a terminal cell (FIGURE 38.10). The terminal cell eventually gives rise to most of the embryo. The basal cell continues to divide transversely, producing a thread of cells called the suspensor, which anchors the embryo to its parent. The suspensor functions in the transfer of nutrients to the embryo from the parent plant and, in some plants, from the endosperm. Meanwhile, the terminal cell divides several times and forms a spherical proembryo attached to the suspensor. The cotyledons (seed leaves) begin to form as bumps on the proembryo. A dicot, with its two cotyledons, is heart-shaped at this stage. Only one cotyledon develops in monocots.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 38-10. The development of a dicot plant embryo. By the time the ovule becomes a mature seed and the integuments harden and thicken to form the seed coat, the zygote has given rise to an embryonic plant with rudimentary organs.

Soon after the rudimentary cotyledons appear, the embryo elongates. Cradled between the cotyledons is the apical meristem of the embryonic shoot. At the opposite end of the embryo's axis, where the suspensor attaches, is the apex of the embryonic root, also with a meristem. After the seed germinates, the apical meristems at the tips of shoot and root will sustain primary growth as long as the plant lives (see Chapter 35). The three primary meristems--protoderm, ground meristem, and procambium--are also present in the embryo. Thus, development of the embryo establishes two features of plant form: the root-shoot axis, with meristems at opposite ends; and a radial pattern of protoderm, ground meristem, and procambium, set to give rise to the three tissue systems (dermal, ground, and vascular tissues).

Structure of the Mature Seed

During the last stages of its maturation, the seed dehydrates until its water content is only about 5-15%  of its weight. The embryo, surrounded by its enlarged cotyledons or endosperm, or both, stops growing until the seed germinates. The embryo and its food supply are enclosed by a protective seed coat formed from the integuments of the ovule.

We can take a closer look at one type of dicot seed by splitting open the seed of a common bean. At this stage, the embryo consists of an elongate structure, the embryonic axis, attached to fleshy cotyledons (FIGURE 38.11a, p. 792). Below the point at which the cotyledons are attached, the embryonic axis is called the hypocotyl (from the Greek hypo, "under"). The hypocotyl terminates in the radicle, or embryonic root. The portion of the embryonic axis above the cotyledons is the epicotyl (from the Greek epi, "on" or "over"). At its tip is the plumule, consisting of the shoot tip with a pair of miniature leaves.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 38-11. Seed structure.

The cotyledons of the common bean are fleshy before the seed germinates because they absorbed food from the endosperm when the seed developed. However, the seeds of some dicots, such as castor beans (Ricinus communis), retain their food supply in the endosperm and have cotyledons that are very thin (FIGURE 38.11b). The cotyledons will absorb nutrients from the endosperm and transfer them to the embryo when the seed germinates.

The seed of a monocot has a single cotyledon (FIGURE 38.11c). Members of the grass family, including maize and wheat, have a specialized type of cotyledon called a scutellum (L. scutella, "small shield," a reference to the scutellum's shape). The scutellum is very thin, with a large surface area pressed against the endosperm, from which the scutellum absorbs nutrients during germination. The embryo of a grass seed is enclosed by two sheathes, a coleorhiza, which covers the young root, and a coleoptile, which covers the young shoot.




