
 Providing structural support to the cell, the cytoskeleton also functions in cell motility and regulation

The most obvious function of the cytoskeleton is to give mechanical support to the cell and maintain its shape. This is especially important for animal cells, which lack walls. The remarkable strength and resilience of the cytoskeleton as a whole is based on its architecture. Like a geodesic dome, the cytoskeleton is stabilized by a balance between opposing forces exerted by its elements. And just as the skeleton of an animal helps fix the positions of other body parts, the cytoskeleton provides anchorage for many organelles and even cytosolic enzyme molecules. The cytoskeleton is more dynamic than an animal skeleton, however. It can be quickly dismantled in one part of the cell and reassembled in a new location, changing the shape of the cell.

The cytoskeleton is also involved in several types of cell motility (movement). The term cell motility encompasses both changes in cell location and more limited movements of parts of the cell. Cell motility generally requires the interaction of the cytoskeleton with proteins called motor molecules (FIGURE 7.21). Examples of such cell motility abound. Motor molecules of the cytoskeleton bring about the movements of cilia and flagella by allowing components of the cytoskeleton to slide past each other. The same mechanism causes muscle cells to contract. Vesicles often travel to their destinations in the cell along "monorails" provided by the cytoskeleton. For example, as discussed in the interview with George Langford (pp. 106-107), this is how vesicles containing neurotransmitter molecules migrate to the tips of axons, the long extensions of nerve cells that release these molecules as chemical signals to adjacent nerve cells. It is the cytoskeleton that manipulates the plasma membrane to form food vacuoles during phagocytosis. The streaming of cytoplasm that circulates materials within many large plant cells is yet another kind of cellular movement brought about by components of the cytoskeleton.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 7-21. Motor molecules and the cytoskeleton. The microtubules and microfilaments of the cytoskeleton function in motility by interacting with proteins called motor molecules. Motor molecules work by changing their shapes, moving back and forth something like microscopic legs. ATP powers these conformational changes. With each cycle of shape change, the motor molecule releases at its free end and then grips at a site farther along a microtubule or microfilament.

The most recent addition to the list of possible cytoskeletal functions is the regulation of biochemical activities in the cell. Mounting evidence suggests that the cytoskeleton can transmit mechanical forces from the surface of the cell to its interior--and even, via other fibers, into the nucleus. In one experiment, investigators used a micromanipulation device to pull on certain plasma membrane proteins attached to the cytoskeleton. A video microscope captured almost instantaneous rearrangements of nucleoli and other structures in the nucleus. In this way, the transmission of naturally occurring mechanical signals by the cytoskeleton may help regulate cell function.

Now let's look more closely at the three main types of fibers that make up the cytoskeleton (TABLE 7.2). Microtubules are the thickest of the three types; microfilaments (also called actin filaments) are the thinnest; and intermediate filaments are fibers with diameters in a middle range.

Table 7-2. The Structure and Function of the Cytoskeleton

PropertyMicrotubulesMicrofilaments (Actin Filaments)Intermediate FilamentsStructureHollow tubes; wall consists of 13 columns of tubulin moleculesTwo intertwined strands of actinFibrous proteins supercoiled into thicker cablesDiameter25 nm with 15-nm lumen7 nm8-12 nmProtein subunitsTubulin, consisting of a-tubulin and b-tubulinActinOne of several different proteins of the keratin family, depending on cell typeMain functionsMaintenance of cell shape (compression-resisting "girders")Maintenance of cell shape (tension-bearing elements)Maintenance of cell shape (tension-bearing elements)Cell motility (as in cilia or flagella)Changes in cell shapeAnchorage of nucleus and certain other organellesChromosome movements in cell divisionMuscle contractionFormation of nuclear laminaOrganelle movementsCytoplasmic streamingCell motility (as in pseudopodia)Cell division (cleavage furrow formation)



SOURCE: Adapted from W. M. Becker, L. J. Kleinsmith, and J. Hardin, The World of the Cell, 4th ed. (San Francisco, CA: Benjamin Cummings, 2000), p. 753.Microtubules

Microtubules are found in the cytoplasm of all eukaryotic cells. They are hollow rods measuring about 25 mm in diameter and from 200 nm to 25 mm in length. The wall of the hollow tube is constructed from a globular protein called tubulin. Each tubulin molecule is a dimer consisting of two slightly different polypeptide subunits, a-tubulin and b-tubulin. A microtubule grows in length by adding tubulin dimers to its ends. Microtubules can be disassembled and their tubulin used to build microtubules elsewhere in the cell.

Microtubules shape and support the cell and also serve as tracks along which organelles equipped with motor molecules can move (see FIGURE 7.21). For example, microtubules guide secretory vesicles from the Golgi apparatus to the plasma membrane. Microtubules are also responsible for the separation of chromosomes during cell division (see Chapter 12).

Centrosomes and Centrioles. In many cells, microtubules grow out from a centrosome, a region often located near the nucleus. These microtubules function as compression-resisting girders of the cytoskeleton. Within the centrosome of an animal cell are a pair of centrioles, each composed of nine sets of triplet microtubules arranged in a ring (FIGURE 7.22). Before a cell divides, the centrioles replicate. Although centrioles may help organize microtubule assembly, they are not essential for this function in all eukaryotes; centrosomes of most plants lack centrioles altogether.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 7-22. Centrosome containing a pair of centrioles. An animal cell has a pair of centrioles within its centrosome, the region near the nucleus where the cell's microtubules are initiated. The centrioles, each about 250 nm (0.25 mm) in diameter, are arranged at right angles to each other, and each is made up of nine sets of three microtubules. The blue portions of the drawing represent nontubulin proteins that connect the microtubule triplets (TEM).

Cilia and Flagella. In eukaryotes, a specialized arrangement of microtubules is responsible for the beating of flagella and cilia, locomotor appendages that protrude from some cells. Many unicellular eukaryotic organisms are propelled through water by cilia or flagella, and the sperm of animals, algae, and some plants are flagellated. If cilia or flagella extend from cells that are held in place as part of a tissue layer, they function to move fluid over the surface of the tissue. For example, the ciliated lining of the windpipe sweeps mucus containing trapped debris out of the lungs (see FIGURE 7.2).

Cilia usually occur in large numbers on the cell surface. They are about 0.25 mm in diameter and about 2-20 mm in length. Flagella are the same diameter but longer than cilia, measuring 10-200 mm in length. Also, flagella are usually limited to just one or a few per cell.

Flagella and cilia also differ in their beating patterns (FIGURE 7.23). A flagellum has an undulating motion that generates force in the same direction as the flagellum's axis. In contrast, cilia work more like oars, with alternating power and recovery strokes generating force in a direction perpendicular to the cilium's axis.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 7-23. A comparison of the beating of flagella and cilia.

Though different in length, number per cell, and beating pattern, cilia and flagella share a common ultrastructure. A cilium or flagellum has a core of microtubules sheathed in an extension of the plasma membrane (FIGURE 7.24). Nine doublets of microtubules, the members of each pair sharing part of their walls, are arranged in a ring. In the center of the ring are two single microtubules. This arrangement, referred to as the "9 + 2" pattern, is found in nearly all eukaryotic flagella and cilia. (The flagella of motile prokaryotes, which will be discussed in Chapter 27, are entirely different.) Flexible "wheels" of proteins, evenly spaced along the length of the cilium or flagellum, connect the outer doublets to each other and to the two central microtubules (note the radial spokes in FIGURE 7.24c). Each outer doublet also has pairs of side-arms spaced along its length and reaching toward the neighboring doublet; these are motor molecules. The microtubule assembly of a cilium or flagellum is anchored in the cell by a basal body, which is structurally identical to a centriole. In fact, in many animals (including humans), the basal body of the fertilizing sperm's flagellum enters the egg and becomes a centriole.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 7-24. Ultrastructure of a eukaryotic flagellum or cilium.

The motor molecules extending from each microtubule doublet to the next are made of a large protein called dynein. These dynein arms are responsible for the bending movements of cilia and flagella. A dynein arm performs a complex cycle of movements caused by changes in the conformation of the protein, with ATP providing the energy for these changes.

The mechanics of dynein "walking" are reminiscent of a cat climbing a tree by attaching its claws, moving its legs, releasing its front claws, and grabbing again farther up the tree. Similarly, the dynein arms of one doublet attach to an adjacent doublet and pull so that the doublets slide past each other in opposite directions. The arms then release from the other doublet and reattach a little farther along its length. Without any restraints on the movement of the microtubule doublets, one doublet would continue to "walk" along the surface of the other, elongating the cilium or flagellum rather than bending it (see FIGURE 7.21a). For lateral movement of a cilium or flagellum, the dynein "walking" must have something to pull against, as when the muscles in your leg pull against your bones to move your knee. In cilia and flagella, the microtubule doublets seem to be held in place by the protein cross-links between the doublets, the radial spokes, and the other structural elements. Thus, neighboring doublets cannot slide past each other very far. Instead, the forces exerted by the dynein arms cause the doublets to curve, bending the cilium or flagellum (FIGURE 7.25).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 7-25. How dynein "walking" moves cilia and flagella. Powered by ATP, the dynein arms of one microtubule doublet grip the adjacent doublet, pull, release, and then grip again. The doublets cannot slide far because they are physically restrained within the cilium or flagellum, so they bend. For clarity, the two central microtubules and the radial spokes are omitted here.

Microfilaments (Actin Filaments)

Microfilaments are solid rods about 7 nm in diameter. They are also called actin filaments, because they are built from molecules of actin, a globular protein. A microfilament is a twisted double chain of actin subunits (see TABLE 7.2). Microfilaments seem to be present in all eukaryotic cells.

In contrast to the compression-resisting role of microtubules, the structural role of microfilaments in the cytoskeleton is to bear tension (pulling forces). In combination with other proteins, they often form a three-dimensional network just inside the plasma membrane, helping support the cell's shape. This network gives the cortex (outer cytoplasmic layer) of such a cell the semisolid consistency of a gel, in contrast with the more fluid (sol) state of the interior cytoplasm. In animal cells specialized for transporting materials across the plasma membrane, bundles of microfilaments make up the core of microvilli, delicate projections that increase the cell surface area (FIGURE 7.26).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 7-26. A structural role of microfilaments. The surface area of this nutrient-absorbing intestinal cell is increased by its many microvilli, cellular extensions reinforced by bundles of microfilaments. These actin filaments are anchored to a network of intermediate filaments (TEM).

Microfilaments are well known for their role in cell motility, particularly as part of the contractile apparatus of muscle cells. Thousands of actin filaments are arranged parallel to one another along the length of a muscle cell, interdigitated with thicker filaments made of a protein called myosin (FIGURE 7.27a). Myosin acts as a motor molecule by means of projections (arms) that "walk" along the actin filaments. Contraction of the muscle cell results from the actin and myosin filaments sliding past one another in this way, shortening the cell. In other kinds of cells, actin filaments are associated with myosin in miniature and less elaborate versions of the arrangement in muscle cells. These actin-myosin aggregates are responsible for localized contractions of cells. For example, a contracting belt of microfilaments forms a cleavage furrow that pinches a dividing animal cell into two daughter cells.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 7-27. Microfilaments and motility. In the three examples shown in this figure, cell nuclei and most other organelles have been omitted.

Localized contraction brought about by actin and myosin also plays a role in amoeboid movement (FIGURE 7.27b), in which a cell crawls along a surface by extending and flowing into cellular extensions called pseudopodia (from the Greek pseudes, false, and pod, foot). Pseudopodia extend and contract through the reversible assembly of actin subunits into microfilaments and of microfilaments into networks that convert cytoplasm from sol to gel. According to a widely accepted model, filaments near the cell's trailing end interact with myosin, causing contraction. Like squeezing on a toothpaste tube, this contraction forces the interior fluid into the pseudopodium, where the actin network has been weakened. The pseudopodium extends until the actin reassembles into a network. Not only do amoebas move by crawling, but so do many cells in the animal body, such as white blood cells.

In plant cells, both actin-myosin interactions and sol-gel transformations brought about by actin may be involved in cytoplasmic streaming, a circular flow of cytoplasm within cells (FIGURE 7.27c). This movement, which is especially common in large plant cells, speeds the distribution of materials within the cell.

Intermediate Filaments

Intermediate filaments are named for their diameter, which, at 8-12 nm, is larger than the diameter of microfilaments but smaller than that of microtubules (see TABLE 7.2 and FIGURE 7.26). Specialized for bearing tension (like microtubules), intermediate filaments are a diverse class of cytoskeletal elements. Each type is constructed from a different molecular subunit belonging to a family of proteins called keratins. Microtubules and microfilaments, in contrast, are consistent in diameter and composition in all eukaryotic cells.

Intermediate filaments are more permanent fixtures of cells than are microfilaments and microtubules, which are often disassembled and reassembled in various parts of a cell. Chemical treatments that remove microfilaments and microtubules from the cytoplasm leave a web of intermediate filaments that retains its original shape. Such experiments suggest that intermediate filaments are especially important in reinforcing the shape of a cell and fixing the position of certain organelles. For example, the nucleus commonly sits within a cage made of intermediate filaments, fixed in location by branches of the filaments that extend into the cytoplasm. Other intermediate filaments make up the nuclear lamina that lines the interior of the nuclear envelope (see FIGURE 7.9). In cases where the shape of the entire cell is correlated with function, intermediate filaments support that shape. For instance, the long extensions (axons) of nerve cells that transmit impulses are strengthened by one class of intermediate filament. The various kinds of intermediate filaments may function as the framework of the entire cytoskeleton.




