
Chapter 24: THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES

WHAT IS A SPECIES?

   The biological species concept emphasizes reproductive isolation

   Prezygotic and postzygotic barriers isolate the gene pools of biological species

   The biological species concept has some major limitations

   Evolutionary biologists have proposed several alternative concepts of species



MODES OF SPECIATION

   Allopatric speciation: Geographic barriers can lead to the origin of species

   Sympatric speciation: A new species can originate in the geographic midst of the parent species

   The punctuated equilibrium model has stimulated research on the tempo of speciation



FROM SPECIATION TO MACROEVOLUTION

   Most evolutionary novelties are modified versions of older structures

   "Evo-devo": Genes that control development play a major role in evolution

   An evolutionary trend does not mean that evolution is goal oriented

When Darwin saw that the geologically young Gal&aacute;pagos Islands had already become populated with many plants and animals known nowhere else in the world, he realized that he was visiting a place of genesis. The islands are named for the giant tortoises, such as the Geochelone elephantopus shown above, that are among the unique inhabitants. (Gal&aacute;pago is the Spanish word for tortoise.) After visiting the Gal&aacute;pagos, Darwin wrote in his diary: "Both in space and time, we seem to be brought somewhat near to that great fact--that mystery of mysteries--the first appearance of new beings on this Earth." The beginning of new forms of life--the origin of species--is at the focal point of evolutionary theory, for it is in new species that biological diversity arises. It is not enough to explain how adaptations evolve in populations, a topic covered in Chapter 23. Evolutionary theory must also explain macroevolution, the origin of new taxonomic groups (new species, new genera, new families, even new kingdoms). Speciation (the origin of new species) is the key process because any genus, family, or higher taxon originates with a new species that is novel enough to be the inaugural member of the higher taxon.

The fossil record chronicles two patterns of speciation: anagenesis and cladogenesis (FIGURE 24.1). Anagenesis (from the Greek ana, up, and genesis, origin), also known as phyletic evolution, is the accumulation of changes associated with the transformation of one species into another. Cladogenesis (from the Greek clados, branch), also called branching evolution, is the budding of one or more new species from a parent species that continues to exist. Only cladogenesis can promote biological diversity by increasing the number of species.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 24-1. Two patterns of speciation. (a) Anagenesis (phyletic evolution) is the accumulation of heritable changes in a population, transforming that population into a new species. (b) Cladogenesis is branching evolution, in which a new species arises from a population that buds from a parent species. Cladogenesis is the basis for biological diversity.

Our objectives in this chapter are to evaluate definitions of species and mechanisms of speciation and to examine the possible origins of some novel features that define higher taxonomic groups. Our first step is to appraise the assumption that species actually exist in nature as discrete biological units distinct from all others.




