
 Ectotherms have body temperatures close to environmental temperature; endotherms can use metabolic heat to keep body temperature warmer than their surroundings

Although all animals exchange heat through some combination of conduction, convection, radiation, and evaporation, there are important differences in how various species manage their heat budgets. One way to classify the thermal characteristics of animals is to emphasize the role of metabolic heat in determining body temperature. An ectotherm has such a low metabolic rate that the amount of heat it generates is too small to have much effect on body temperature. Consequently, ectotherm body temperatures are almost entirely determined by the temperature of the surrounding environment. Most invertebrates, fishes, amphibians, and reptiles are ectotherms. In contrast, an endotherm's high metabolic rate generates enough heat to keep its body substantially warmer than the environment. Mammals, birds, some fishes, a few reptiles, and numerous insect species are endotherms.

Many endotherms, including humans, maintain high and very stable internal temperature even as the temperature of their surroundings fluctuates (FIGURE 44.4). However, it is not constant body temperature that distinguishes endotherms from ectotherms. For example, many ectothermic marine fishes and invertebrates inhabit water with such stable temperatures that their body temperature varies less than that of humans and other endotherms. Also, many endotherms sustain high body temperatures only part of the time (for example, while they are active). And not all ectotherms have low body temperatures: When sitting in the sun, many ectothermic lizards have higher body temperatures than mammals. Therefore, most biologists do not use the familiar terms cold-blooded and warm-blooded because they are frequently misleading.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 44-4. The relationship between body temperature and ambient (environmental) temperature in an ectotherm and an endotherm.
Modified from P. T. Marshall and G. M. Hughes, Physiology of Mammals and Other Vertebrates, 2nd ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980). Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press.

Endothermy has several important advantages. High and stable body temperature, along with other biochemical and physiological adaptations associated with endothermy (such as elaborate circulatory and respiratory systems), give these animals very high levels of aerobic metabolism (cellular respiration). This allows endotherms to perform vigorous activity for much longer than is possible for ectotherms (see FIGURE 40.13). Sustained intense activity, such as long-distance running or powered (flapping) flight, is usually only feasible for animals with an endothermic way of life. Endothermy also solves certain thermal problems of living on land, enabling terrestrial animals to maintain stable body temperature in the face of environmental temperature fluctuations that are generally more severe than in aquatic habitats. For example, no ectotherm can be active in the below-freezing weather that prevails during winter over much of Earth's surface, but many endotherms function very well in these conditions. Most of the time, endothermic vertebrates--birds and mammals--are warmer than their surroundings, but these animals also have mechanisms for cooling the body in a hot environment, and this enables them to withstand heat loads that are intolerable for most ectotherms.

Being endothermic is liberating, but it is also energetically expensive, especially in a cold environment. For example, at 20&#176;C, a human at rest has a metabolic rate of 1,300 to 1,800 kcal per day (see Chapter 40). In contrast, a resting ectotherm of similar weight, such as an American alligator, has a metabolic rate of only about 60 kcal per day at 20&#176;C. Thus, endotherms generally need to consume much more food than ectotherms of equivalent size--a serious disadvantage for endotherms if food supplies are limited. For this and other reasons, ectothermy is an extremely effective and successful "strategy" in many terrestrial environments, as shown by the abundance and diversity of ectothermic insects, spiders, amphibians, and reptiles.




