
 Cancer results from genetic changes that affect the cell cycle

Certain genes normally regulate cell growth and division--the cell cycle--and mutations that alter those genes in somatic cells can lead to cancer. The agent of such change can be random spontaneous mutation. However, it is likely that many cancer-causing mutations result from environmental influences such as chemical carcinogens, physical mutagens such as X-rays, or certain viruses. In fact, a breakthrough in understanding cancer came from the study of tumors induced by viruses. This research led to the discovery of cancer-causing genes called oncogenes in certain retroviruses (from the Greek onco, tumor). Subsequently, close counterparts of these oncogenes were found in the genomes of humans and other animals. The normal cellular genes, called proto-oncogenes, code for proteins that stimulate normal cell growth and division. (To review the cell cycle, see Chapter 12.)

How might a proto-oncogene--a gene that has an essential function in normal cells--become an oncogene, a cancer-causing gene? In general, an oncogene arises from a ge-netic change that leads to an increase in either the amount of the proto-oncogene's protein product or the intrinsic activity of each protein molecule. The genetic changes that convert proto-oncogenes to oncogenes fall into three main categories: movement of DNA within the genome, amplification of a proto-oncogene, and point mutation in a proto-oncogene (FIGURE 19.13). Malignant cells are frequently found to contain chromosomes that have broken and rejoined incorrectly, translocating fragments from one chromosome to another (see FIGURE 15.13). A proto-oncogene ending up in the joint region may now lie adjacent to an especially active promoter (or other control element) that increases transcription of the gene, making it an oncogene. An increase in gene expression can also arise when a proto-oncogene comes under the control of a more active promoter by transposition of either the gene or the promoter within a chromosome. The second main type of genetic change, amplification, increases the number of copies of the gene in the cell. The third possibility is a point mutation that changes the gene's protein product to one that is more active or more resistant to degradation than the normal protein. All these mechanisms can lead to abnormal stimulation of the cell cycle and put the cell on the path to malignancy.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 19-13. Genetic changes that can turn proto-oncogenes into oncogenes.

In addition to mutations affecting growth-stimulating proteins, changes in genes whose normal products inhibit cell division also contribute to cancer. Such genes are called tumor-suppressor genes because the proteins they encode normally help prevent uncontrolled cell growth. Any mutation that decreases the normal activity of a tumor-suppressor protein may contribute to the onset of cancer, in effect stimulating growth through the absence of suppression. The protein products of tumor-suppressor genes have various functions. For instance, some tumor-suppressor proteins normally repair damaged DNA, a function that prevents the cell from accumulating -cancer-causing mutations. Other tumor-suppressor proteins control the adhesion of cells to each other or to an extracellular matrix; proper cell anchorage is crucial in normal tissues--and often absent in cancers. Still other tumor-suppressor proteins are components of cell-signaling pathways that inhibit the cell cycle.

We'll encounter some important tumor-suppressor proteins and oncogene proteins in the next section, as we examine their roles in cell-signaling pathways.




