
 The flower is the defining reproductive adaptation of angiosperms

The flower is an angiosperm structure specialized for reproduction. In many angiosperms, insects and other animals transfer pollen from one flower to female sex organs on another flower, which makes pollination less random than the wind-dependent pollination of most gymnosperms. However, some flowering plants are wind-pollinated, a characteristic especially common for plants that occur in dense populations, such as grasses and tree species in temperate forests.

A flower is a specialized shoot with four circles of modified leaves: sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels (FIGURE 30.13). Starting at the bottom of the flower are the sepals, which are usually green. They are modified leaves that enclose the flower before it opens (think of a rosebud). Above the sepals are the petals, brightly colored in most flowers. They aid in attracting insects and other pollinators. Flowers that are wind-pollinated generally lack bright-colored parts. The sepals and petals are sterile floral parts, meaning that they are not directly involved in reproduction. Within the ring of petals are the fertile sporophylls, the leaf-derived parts that produce spores. The two rings of sporophylls are the stamens and carpels. Stamens are the male reproductive organs, the sporophylls that produce microspores that give rise to male gametophytes. Carpels are the female sporophylls, the organs that make megaspores and their products, female gametophytes. A stamen consists of a stalk called the filament and a terminal sac, the anther, where pollen is produced. At the tip of the carpel is a sticky stigma that receives pollen. A style leads to the ovary at the base of the carpel. Protected within the ovary are the ovules, which develop into seeds after fertilization.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 30-13. The structure of a flower. (a) The parts of an idealized flower. (b) The photo shows a cutaway view of a daffodil flower.

Recall that the enclosure of seeds within the ovary is one of the features that distinguishes angiosperms from gymnosperms. The carpel probably evolved from a seed-bearing leaf (sporophyll) that became rolled into a tube (FIGURE 30.14). Some angiosperms, such as garden peas, have flowers with single carpels. Others, such as magnolias, have several separate carpels. Still other species, such as lilies, have two or more fused carpels, usually forming an ovary with multiple ovule-containing chambers.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 30-14. Hypothesis for the origin of the carpel from a reproductive leaf (sporophyll). The enclosure of ovules (and seeds) within an ovary may have resulted from the rolling of leaves bearing megasporangia on their margins. A similar process may have trans formed sporophylls with microsporangia into the anthers of stamens.




