
 The goal of sustainable development is reorienting ecological research and challenging all of us to reassess our values

Facing increasing loss and fragmentation of habitats, how can we best manage Earth's resources? If we are to conserve most of a nation's species, which habitat patches are most crucial? Among the limited choices, which areas are most practical to protect and manage if we are to save rare species or the greatest number of species?

We must understand the complex interconnections of the biosphere if we are to make sensible decisions about how to conserve these networks. To this end, many nations, scientific societies, and private foundations have embraced the concept of sustainable development, the long-term prosperity of human societies and the ecosystems that support them. The forward-looking Ecological Society of America, the world's largest organization of professional ecologists, endorses a research agenda called the Sustainable Biosphere Initiative. The goal of this initiative is to define and acquire the basic ecological information necessary for the intelligent and responsible development, management, and conservation of Earth's resources. The research agenda includes studies of global change, including interactions between climate and ecological processes; biological diversity and its role in maintaining ecological processes; and the ways in which the productivity of natural and artificial ecosystems can be sustained. This initiative requires a strong commitment of human and economic resources.

Sustainable development, of course, is not just about science. It depends on most of us reassessing our values. Those of us living in affluent developed nations are responsible for the greatest amount of environmental degradation. Reality demands that we distinguish what we need from what we want, learn to revere the natural processes that sustain us, and reduce our orientation toward short-term personal gain. The current state of the biosphere demonstrates that we are treading precariously on uncharted ecological ground and that the importance of our scientific and personal efforts cannot be overstated.

Conservation science is an intersection of numerous facets of biology, including ecology, evolution, physiology, molecular biology, genetics, and behavior. Efforts to sustain ecosystem processes and stem the loss of biodiversity also connect life science with the social sciences, economics, and humanities. In fact, we'll end our book with a note of optimism based on our humanity.




