
 Aquatic biomes occupy the largest part of the biosphere

Aquatic biomes account for the largest part of the biosphere in terms of area. Ecologists distinguish between freshwater biomes and marine biomes on the basis of physical and chemical differences. For example, marine biomes generally have salt concentrations that average 3% , whereas freshwater biomes are usually characterized by a salt concentration of less than 1% .

Covering about 75%  of Earth's surface, oceans have always had an enormous impact on the biosphere. The evaporation of seawater provides most of the planet's rainfall, and ocean temperatures have a major effect on world climate and wind patterns. In addition, marine algae and photosynthetic bacteria supply a substantial portion of the world's oxygen and consume huge amounts of atmospheric carbon dioxide.

Freshwater biomes are closely linked to the soils and biotic components of the terrestrial biomes through which they pass or in which they are situated. The particular characteristics of a freshwater biome are also influenced by the patterns and speed of water flow and the climate to which the biome is exposed.

Vertical Stratification of Aquatic Biomes

Many aquatic biomes exhibit pronounced vertical stratification of physical and chemical variables. Light is absorbed by both the water itself and the microorganisms in it, so that its intensity decreases rapidly with depth. Ecologists distinguish between the upper photic zone, where there is sufficient light for photosynthesis, and the lower aphotic zone, where little light penetrates. Water temperature also tends to be stratified, especially during summer and winter (see FIGURE 50.15). Heat energy from sunlight warms the surface waters to whatever depth the sunlight penetrates, but the deeper waters remain quite cold. In the ocean and in many temperate-zone lakes, a narrow stratum of rapid temperature change called a thermocline separates a more uniformly warm upper layer from more uniformly cold deeper waters. At the bottom of all aquatic biomes, the substrate is called the benthic zone. Made up of sand and organic and inorganic sediments ("ooze"), the benthic zone is occupied by communities of organisms collectively called benthos. A major source of food for the benthos is dead organic matter called detritus. In lakes and oceans, detritus "rains" down from the productive surface waters of the photic zone.

Freshwater Biomes

There are two general categories of freshwater biomes: standing bodies of water (such as lakes and ponds) and moving bodies of water (rivers and streams). Standing bodies of water range from small ponds that are a few square meters to large lakes that are thousands of square kilometers in area. In most lakes, communities of organisms are distributed according to the depth of the water and its distance from shore (FIGURE 50.18). Rooted and floating aquatic plants flourish in the littoral zone, the shallow, well-lit waters close to shore. In a lake, the well-lit, open surface waters farther from shore, called the limnetic zone, are occupied by a variety of phytoplankton consisting of algae and cyanobacteria. These organisms photosynthesize and reproduce at a high rate during spring and summer. Zooplankton, mostly rotifers and small crustaceans, graze on the phytoplankton. The zooplankton are consumed by many small fish, which in turn become food for larger fish, semiaquatic snakes and turtles, and fish-eating birds.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 50-18. Zonation in a lake.

Most of the small organisms of a lake's limnetic zone are short-lived, and their remains continually sink into a deep aphotic region, called the profundal zone, and down to the benthic zone. Microbes in the profundal and benthic zones use oxygen for cellular respiration as they decompose this detritus.

Lakes are often classified according to their production of organic matter. Oligotrophic lakes are deep and nutrient-poor, and the phytoplankton in the limnetic zone are relatively sparse and not very productive (FIGURE 50.19a). Eutrophic lakes, in contrast, are usually shallower, and the nutrient content of their water is high. As a result, the phytoplankton are very productive, and the waters are often quite murky (FIGURE 50.19b). Between the oligotrophic and eutrophic extremes are lakes with a moderate amount of nutrients and phytoplankton productivity; these lakes are said to be mesotrophic.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 50-19. Freshwater biomes. (a) Oligotrophic lakes, such as Lake Baikal (shown here), in Siberia, are nutrient-poor with a small surface area relative to depth. The bottom sediments are low in decomposable organic matter, limiting bacterial populations in the benthos. The shortage of nutrients in the water limits photosynthesis by plankton in the limnetic zone; as a result, the water is clear and oxygen-rich and usually supports diverse populations of fish and invertebrates. (b) Eutrophic lakes, such as this one called Peck's Pond, in the Pocono Mountains of eastern Pennsylvania, are nutrient-rich and generally have a larger surface area relative to depth. The availability of nutrients supports a high rate of photosynthesis, leading to murkier water than that of an oligotrophic lake. High organic content in the benthos leads to high decomposition rates and potentially low oxygen supplies in the profundal and benthic zones. (c) Rivers and streams support substantially different biological communities than those in ponds and lakes. The photograph shows the mouth of a stream, flowing into the much larger Snake River, in Idaho.

Over long periods of time, oligotrophic lakes may become mesotrophic and eventually eutrophic as runoff from the surrounding land brings in additional sediments and nutrients. Unfortunately, human activities often speed this natural process dramatically. Runoff from fertilized lawns and agricultural fields and the dumping of municipal wastes enrich the lakes with excessive amounts of nitrogen and phosphorus; the normally low concentrations of these nutrients limit the growth of algae, including phytoplankton. The result of such pollution is often a population explosion of algae, the production of much detritus, and the eventual depletion of oxygen supplies. Such "cultural eutrophication" makes the water unusable and degrades the lake's aesthetic value (see Chapter 54).

Streams and rivers are bodies of water moving continuously in one direction (FIGURE 50.19c). At the headwaters of a stream (perhaps a spring or snowmelt), the water is often cold and clear, and it carries little sediment and relatively few mineral nutrients. The channel is usually narrow, with a swift current passing over a rocky substrate. Farther downstream, where numerous tributaries may have joined to form a river, the water may be more turbid, carrying substantially more sediment (from the erosion of soil) and nutrients. The channel near the mouth of a river is relatively wide, and the substrate is generally silty from the deposition of sediments over long periods of time.

The nutrient content of flowing water biomes is largely determined by the terrain and vegetation through which the water flows. Fallen leaves from dense, overhanging vegetation can add substantial amounts of organic matter, and the weathering of rocks can increase the concentration of inorganic nutrients. The often turbulent flow of a stream constantly oxygenates the water, whereas the sometimes murkier, warmer waters of a large river may contain relatively little oxygen. Stream- and river-dwelling animals exhibit evolutionary adaptations that enable them to resist being swept away. The smaller ones are typically flat in shape and can attach to rocks temporarily. Many arthropods live on the underside or downstream side of rocks, thereby exploiting a microhabitat that is relatively free of turbulent flow.

Many streams and rivers have been polluted by human activities. For centuries, humans have used streams and rivers as depositories of waste, thinking that these materials would be diluted and carried downstream. While some pollutants are carried far from their source, many settle to the bottom, where they can be taken up by aquatic organisms. Even the pollutants that are carried away contribute to estuary, ocean, and lake pollution. Humans have also changed flow patterns, using stream channelization to speed water flow and dams to restrain it. In many cases, dams have completely changed the downstream ecosystems, altering the intensity and volume of water flow and affecting fish and invertebrate populations (FIGURE 50.20).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 50-20. Damming the Columbia River Basin. If Lewis and Clark lived today, they would have a hard time navigating the Columbia. This map shows only the largest of the 250 dams that have altered freshwater ecosystems throughout the Pacific Northwest. The great concrete obstacles make it difficult for salmon to swim upriver to their breeding streams, though many dams now have "fish ladders" that provide detours.

Wetlands

In the simplest sense, a wetland is an area covered with water that supports aquatic plants. In fact, wetlands range from periodically flooded regions to soil that is permanently saturated during the growing season. These conditions favor the growth of specially adapted plants called hydrophytes ("water plants"), which can grow in water or in soil that is periodically anaerobic due to the presence of water. Hydrophytes include floating pond lilies and emergent cattails, many sedges, tamarack, and black spruce. Both the hydrology and the vegetation of an area are important determinants of its classification as a wetland--a classification that can be critical when federal, state, and local governments are making preservation decisions based on rigorous, and often conflicting, definitions.

There are different types of wetlands, ranging from marshes to swamps to bogs. All these varieties, however, generally develop in one of three topographic situations. Basin wetlands develop in shallow basins, ranging from upland depressions to filled-in lakes and ponds (FIGURE 50.21a). Riverine wetlands develop along shallow and periodically flooded banks of rivers and streams. Fringe wetlands occur along the coasts of large lakes and seas, where water flows back and forth because of rising lake levels or tidal action. Thus, fringe wetlands include both freshwater and marine biomes. Marine coastal wetlands are closely linked to estuaries, which we examine shortly.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 50-21. Wetlands and estuaries. (a) Wetlands. This marsh in Pennsylvania is an example of a basin wetland. Marshes are usually covered with water year-round. Predominant plants are emergent, with stems and leaves extending above the water surface; they include the pond lilies, reeds, and cattails visible in this photograph. Other kinds of wetlands include swamps (dominated by woody plants), bogs (dominated by sphagnum mosses), and seasonal pools. (b) An estuary. This view of an estuary that is part of Chesapeake Bay, in Maryland, shows the intimate association of river mouths and the marine environment into which they carry water. Unfortunately, the land surrounding Chesapeake Bay is heavily populated and industrialized, and pollution that enters the bay through four major rivers has made it unsuitable for many plant and animal species. What was once a bountiful natural source of seafood and other resources has been degraded and rendered less productive by human activity.

Ecologically, wetlands are among the richest of biomes. They contain a diverse community of invertebrates, supporting a wide variety of birds. Herbivores from crustaceans to muskrats consume algae, detritus, and plants. In addition to the rich diversity of species that is supported by wetlands, the ecological and economic value of wetlands exceeds that expected from their geographic extent alone; they provide water-storage basins that reduce the intensity of flooding, and they improve water quality by filtering pollutants. In the past, humans have often regarded wetlands as wastelands--as sources of mosquitoes, flies, and bad odors--and have destroyed many wetlands, mostly filling in with earth to provide land for agriculture and development. Both governments and private organizations are now attempting to protect remaining wetlands through acquisition, economic incentives, and regulation. A great deal of research is under way to determine how wetlands can be created or restored.

Estuaries

The area where a freshwater stream or river merges with the ocean is called an estuary; it is often bordered by extensive coastal wetlands called mudflats and salt marshes (FIGURE 50.21b). Salinity varies spatially within estuaries, from nearly that of fresh water to that of the ocean; it also varies over the course of a day with the rise and fall of the tides. Nutrients from the river enrich estuarine waters, making estuaries one of the most biologically productive biomes on Earth.

Salt marsh grasses, algae, and phytoplankton are the major producers in estuaries. This environment also supports a variety of worms, oysters, crabs, and many of the fish species that humans consume. Many marine invertebrates and fishes use estuaries as a breeding ground or migrate through them to freshwater habitats upstream. Estuaries are also crucial feeding areas for many semiaquatic vertebrates, particularly waterfowl.

Although estuaries support a wide variety of commercially valuable species, areas around estuaries are also prime locations for commercial and residential developments. In addition, estuaries are unfortunately at the receiving end for pollutants dumped upstream. Very little undisturbed estuarine habitat remains, and a large percentage has been totally eliminated by landfill and development. Many states have now--rather belatedly--taken steps to preserve their remaining estuaries.

Zonation in Marine Communities

Similar to the communities in freshwater lakes, marine communities are distributed according to depth of the water, degree of light penetration, distance from shore, and open water versus bottom (FIGURE 50.22, p. 1110). Marine communities illustrate graphically the limitations on distributions that result from these abiotic factors. There is a photic zone where phytoplankton, zooplankton, and many fish species occur, and an aphotic zone below. Because water absorbs light so well and the ocean is so deep, most of the ocean volume is virtually devoid of light, except for tiny amounts produced by a few luminescent fishes and invertebrates. The zone where land meets water is called the intertidal zone; beyond the intertidal zone is the neritic zone, the shallow regions over the continental shelves; and past the continental shelf is the oceanic zone, reaching very great depths. Finally, open water of any depth is the pelagic zone, at the bottom of which is the seafloor, or benthic zone.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 50-22. Zonation in the marine environment. The marine environment can be classified on the basis of three physical criteria: light penetration (photic and aphotic zones), distance from shore and water depth (intertidal, neritic, and oceanic zones), and whether it is open water or bottom (pelagic and benthic zones). The abyssal zone is the benthic region in deep oceans. Ecologists often combine two designations, such as the oceanic pelagic zone, to identify the location of a biome.

Intertidal Zones

An intertidal zone is alternately submerged and exposed by the twice-daily cycle of tides. Intertidal communities are therefore subject to huge daily variations in the availability of seawater (and the nutrients it carries) and in temperature. Perhaps most significant of all, intertidal organisms are subject to the mechanical forces of wave action, which can dislodge them from the habitat.

The rocky intertidal zone is vertically stratified and provides excellent examples of distributional limitations over short distances (FIGURE 50.23a). Most of the organisms have structural adaptations that enable them to attach to the hard substrate in this physically tumultuous environment. On sandy substrates (beaches) or mudflats, the intertidal zone is not as clearly stratified. Wave action and tides constantly move the particles of mud and sand, and few large algae or plants occupy these habitats. Many animals, such as suspension-feeding worms and clams and predatory crustaceans, bury themselves in sand or mud, feeding when the tides bring sources of food. Other surface-dwelling organisms, such as crabs and shorebirds, are scavengers or predators on these organisms.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 50-23. Examples of marine biomes. (a) Intertidal zones. This photograph of rocky intertidal zones on the Oregon coast was taken at low tide to illustrate the vertical zonation of algae and animals. The density of organisms in each of the three major zones is roughly proportional to the percentage of time the zone is submerged. Organisms in the uppermost zone--grazing mollusks, suspension-feeding barnacles, and a few algae--are submerged only during the highest tides and have numerous adaptations that prevent dehydration and overheating. The middle zone, generally submerged at high tide and exposed at low tide, is inhabited by a diverse array of algae, sponges, sea anemones, mollusks, crustaceans, echinoderms, and small fishes. The bottom intertidal zone is exposed only during the lowest tides. A dense cover of seaweeds in this zone often harbors a diversity of invertebrates and fishes. (b) Coral reefs. This coral reef in Fiji illustrates some of the immense variety of microorganisms, invertebrates, and fishes that live among the coral and algae, making coral reefs one of the most diverse and productive biomes on Earth. (c) Benthos: a deep-sea vent community. The species composition of benthos varies dramatically with water depth. Pictured here is a vent community, first discovered at a depth of 2,500 m in the late 1970s. These communities are found at spreading centers on the seafloor, where hot magma superheats the water. About a dozen species of prokaryotes identified near the vents are chemoautotrophic producers that obtain energy by oxidizing H2S formed by a reaction of the hot water with dissolved sulfate (SO42-). Among the animals in these communities are giant tube-dwelling worms (pictured here), some more than 1 m long. They are apparently nourished by chemo-synthetic prokaryotes that live as symbionts within the worms. Many other invertebrates, including arthropods and echinoderms, are also abundant around the vents.

Partly because of our strong attraction to the seashore, humans have had a long-term impact on intertidal ecosystems. The recreational use of ocean shores has caused a severe decline in the numbers of many beach-nesting birds and sea turtles. Incoming tides carry in polluted water and old fishing lines and plastic debris that can harm wildlife. The most dramatic intertidal pollutant is probably oil, which harms not only birds and marine mammals but also intertidal algae and invertebrates. The ultimate outcome of oil pollution in intertidal zones is reduced species diversity, with increases in the populations of a few oil-resistant species.

Coral Reefs

In warm tropical waters in the neritic zone, coral reefs constitute a conspicuous and distinctive biome. Currents and waves constantly renew nutrient supplies to the reefs, and sunlight penetrates to the ocean floor, allowing photosynthesis.

Coral reefs are dominated by the structure of the coral itself, formed by a diverse group of cnidarians that secrete hard external skeletons made of calcium carbonate (see Chapter 33). These skeletons vary in shape, forming a substrate on which other corals, sponges, and algae grow (FIGURE 50.23b). Red algae encrusted with calcium carbonate also add large amounts of limestone to most reefs, as do bryozoans. The coral animals themselves suspension-feed on microscopic organisms and particles of organic debris. They also obtain organic molecules from the photosynthesis of symbiotic dinoflagellate algae that live in their tissues. Coral animals can survive without the dinoflagellates, but their rate of calcium carbonate deposition is much slower without them; thus, reef formation by corals depends on this symbiotic association.

Some coral reefs cover enormous expanses of shallow ocean, but this delicate biome is easily degraded by pollution and development, as well as by souvenir hunters who gather the coral skeletons. High water temperatures (greater than 30&#176;C) cause corals to "bleach"--to expel their symbiotic dinoflagellates and die. In 1998, coral reefs around the world suffered moderate to severe bleaching, and there is great concern that global warming could destroy many coral reefs. Corals are also subject to damage from native and introduced predators, such as the crown-of-thorns sea star, which has undergone a population explosion in many regions and destroyed a number of coral reefs in parts of the western Pacific Ocean. Reef communities are very old and grow very slowly; they may not be able to withstand continued human encroachment and dramatic climate changes.

The Oceanic Pelagic Biome

Most of the ocean's water lies far from shore in the oceanic pelagic biome, constantly mixed by ocean currents. Nutrient concentrations are generally lower in the open ocean than in coastal areas because the remains of plankton and other organisms sink below the photic region into the dark, lower benthic zone. In some tropical areas, surface waters are lower in nutrients than the surface waters of temperate oceans because a year-round thermal stratification prevents an exchange of nutrients between the surface and the deep. Temperate oceans generally are more productive, because, like temperate lakes, they experience a nutrient turnover in the spring and, to a limited extent, in the fall. The springtime recirculation of nutrients from the depths stimulates a surge of photosynthetic plankton growth.

Photosynthetic plankton grow and reproduce rapidly in the photic region of the oceanic biome. Modern sampling methods, which take bacterial photosynthesis into account, show that the plankton's rate of organic food production is higher than formerly thought. Nonetheless, photosynthetic plankton account for less than half the photosynthetic activity on Earth. Zooplankton, including protozoans, worms, copepods, shrimplike krill, jellies, and the small larvae of invertebrates and fishes, graze on the photosynthetic plankton. Most plankton exhibit morphological structures, such as bubble-trapping spines, lipid droplets, gelatinous capsules, and air bladders, that help them stay within the photic zone.

The oceanic pelagic biome also includes free-swimming animals, called nekton, that can move against the currents to locate food. Examples of nekton are large squids, fishes, sea turtles, and marine mammals. These animals feed either on plankton or on each other. Although many of these animals feed in the photic region of the pelagic zone, others live at great depths, where fish may have enlarged eyes, enabling them to see in the very dim light, and luminescent organs that attract mates and prey. Many pelagic birds, such as petrels, terns, albatrosses, and boobies, catch fish in the surface waters.

Benthos

The ocean bottom below the neritic and pelagic zones is the benthic zone, as in other aquatic biomes. Nutrients reach the seafloor from the waters above by "raining down" in the form of detritus. Although the benthic zone in shallow, near-coastal waters may receive substantial sunlight, light and temperature decline dramatically with depth.

Neritic benthic communities are extremely productive, consisting of bacteria, fungi, seaweeds and filamentous algae, numerous invertebrates, and fishes. Species composition of these communities varies with distance from the shore, water depth, and composition of the bottom.

Organisms in the very deep benthic communities, or abyssal zone, are adapted to continuous cold (about 3&#176;C), extremely high water pressure, near or total absence of light, and low nutrient concentrations. However, oxygen is usually present in abyssal waters, and a fairly diverse community of invertebrates and fishes occupies this region. Marine scientists have also discovered a unique assemblage of organisms associated with deep-sea hydrothermal vents of volcanic origin in midocean ridges (FIGURE 50.23c). In this dark, hot, oxygen-deficient environment, the food producers are not photosynthesizing organisms but chemoautotrophic prokaryotes (see Chapter 27). The organic molecules they synthesize support a food chain that includes giant polychaete worms, arthropods, echinoderms, and fishes.




