
 Many human disorders follow Mendelian patterns of inheritance

Pedigrees are a more serious matter when the alleles in question cause disabling or deadly hereditary diseases instead of innocuous human variations such as hairline or earlobe configuration. However, for disorders inherited as simple Mendelian traits, the same techniques of pedigree analysis apply.

Recessively Inherited Disorders

Thousands of genetic disorders are known to be inherited as simple recessive traits. These disorders range in severity from relatively mild, such as albinism (lack of pigmentation, which results in susceptibility to skin cancers and vision problems), to life-threatening, such as cystic fibrosis.

How can we account for the recessive behavior of the alleles causing these disorders? Recall that genes code for proteins of specific function. An allele that causes a genetic disorder codes either for a malfunctional protein or for no protein at all. In the case of disorders classified as recessive, heterozygotes are normal in phenotype because one copy of the "normal" allele produces a sufficient amount of the specific protein. Thus, a recessively inherited disorder shows up only in the homozygous individuals who inherit one recessive allele from each parent. We can symbolize the genotype of such people as aa, with individuals lacking the disorder being either AA or Aa.The heterozygotes (Aa), who are phenotypically normal with regard to the disorder, are called carriers of the disorder because they may transmit the recessive allele to their offspring.

Most people who have recessive disorders are born to parents of normal phenotype who are both carriers. A mating between two carriers corresponds to a Mendelian F1 cross (Aa&#160;X&#160;Aa), with the zygote having a 1/4 chance of inheriting a double dose of the recessive allele. A child of normal phenotype from such a cross has a 2/3 chance of being a carrier. (The genotypic ratio for the offspring is 1AA:2Aa:1aa. Thus, two out of three offspring with normal phenotype--AA or Aa--are predicted to be heterozygous carriers.) Recessive homozygotes could also result from Aa&#160;X&#160;aa and aa&#160;X&#160;aa matings, but if the disorder is lethal before reproductive age or results in sterility, no aa individuals will reproduce. Even if recessive homozygotes are able to reproduce, such individuals will still account for a much smaller percentage of the population than heterozygous carriers, for reasons we will examine in Chapter 23.

In general, a genetic disorder is not evenly distributed among all groups of humans. These disparities result from the different genetic histories of the world's peoples during less technological times, when populations were more geographically (and hence genetically) isolated. We will now examine three examples of recessively inherited disorders.

The most common lethal genetic disease in the United States is cystic fibrosis, which strikes one out of every 2,500 whites of European descent but is much rarer in other groups. One out of 25 whites (4% ) is a carrier. The normal allele for this gene codes for a membrane protein that functions in chloride ion transport between certain cells and the extracellular fluid. These chloride channels are defective or absent in the plasma membranes of children who have inherited two of the recessive alleles that cause cystic fibrosis. The result is an abnormally high concentration of extracellular chloride, which causes the mucus that coats certain cells to become thicker and stickier than normal. The mucus builds up in the pancreas, lungs, digestive tract, and other organs, a condition that favors bacterial infections. Recent research indicates that the extracellular chloride also contributes to infection by disabling a natural antibiotic made by some body cells. When immune cells come to the rescue, their remains add to the mucus, creating a vicious cycle. Untreated, most children with cystic fibrosis die before their fifth birthday. Gentle pounding on the chest to clear mucus from clogged airways, daily doses of antibiotics to prevent infection, and other preventive treatments can prolong life. In the United States, more than half of the people with cystic fibrosis now survive into their late 20s or beyond.

Another lethal disorder inherited as a recessive allele is Tay-Sachs disease, described earlier in the chapter. Recall that the disease is caused by a dysfunctional enzyme that fails to break down brain lipids of a certain class. The symptoms of Tay-Sachs disease usually become manifest a few months after birth. The infant begins to suffer seizures, blindness, and degeneration of motor and mental performance. Inevitably, the child dies within a few years. There is a disproportionately high incidence of Tay-Sachs disease among Ashkenazic Jews, Jewish people whose ancestors lived in central Europe. In that population, the frequency of Tay-Sachs disease is one out of 3,600 births, about 100 times greater than the incidence among non-Jews or Mediterranean (Sephardic) Jews.

The most common inherited disease among blacks is sickle-cell disease,which affects one out of 400 African Americans. Sickle-cell disease is caused by the substitution of a single amino acid in the hemoglobin protein of red blood cells (see FIGURE 5.19). When the oxygen content of an affected individual's blood is low (at high altitudes or under physical stress, for instance), the sickle-cell hemoglobin molecules crystallize by aggregating into long rods. The crystals deform the red cells into a sickle shape. Sickling of the cells, in turn, can lead to other symptoms. The multiple effects of a double dose of the sickle-cell allele are an example of pleiotropy (FIGURE 14.15). Doctors now use regular blood transfusions to ward off brain damage in children with sickle-cell disease, and new drugs can help prevent or treat other problems, but there is no cure.

The non-sickle-cell counterpart of the sickle-cell allele is in fact only incompletely dominant to the sickle-cell allele at the level of the organism. Heterozygotes--carriers of a single sickle-cell allele--are said to have sickle-cell trait. Such people are usually healthy, although a fraction suffer some symptoms of sickle-cell disease when there is an extended reduction of blood oxygen. At the molecular level, the two alleles are codominant; both normal and abnormal hemoglobins are made.

About one out of ten African Americans has sickle-cell trait, an unusually high frequency of heterozygotes for an allele with severe detrimental effects in homozygotes. The reason for the prevalence of this allele appears to be that a single copy of the sickle-cell allele, while not usually producing sickle-cell symptoms, benefits the carrier by increasing resistance to malaria. The malaria parasite spends part of its life cycle in red blood cells (see FIGURE 28.13), and the presence of even heterozygous amounts of sickle-cell hemoglobin gives these cells an increased fragility that tends to interrupt the cycle. Thus, in tropical Africa, where malaria is common, the sickle-cell allele is both boon and bane. The relatively high frequency of African Americans with sickle-cell trait is a vestige of their African roots.

Although it is relatively unlikely that two carriers of the same rare harmful allele will meet and mate, the probability increases greatly if the man and woman are close relatives (for example, siblings or first cousins). These are called consanguineous ("same blood") matings, and they are indicated in pedigrees by double lines. Because people with recent common ancestors are more likely to carry the same recessive alleles than are unrelated people, it is more likely that a mating of close relatives will produce offspring homozygous for recessive traits--including harmful ones. Such effects can be observed in many types of domesticated and zoo animals that have become inbred.

There is debate among geneticists about the extent to which human consanguinity increases the risk of inherited diseases. Many deleterious alleles have such severe effects that a homozygous embryo spontaneously aborts long before birth. Most societies and cultures have laws or taboos forbidding marriages between close relatives. These rules may have evolved out of empirical observation that in most populations, stillbirths and birth defects are more common when parents are closely related. But social and economic factors have also influenced the development of customs and laws against consanguineous marriages.

Dominantly Inherited Disorders

Although most harmful alleles are recessive, many human disorders are due to dominant alleles. One example is achondroplasia, a form of dwarfism with an incidence of one case among every 10,000 people. Heterozygous individuals have the dwarf phenotype. Therefore, all people who are not achondroplastic dwarfs--99.99%  of the population--are homozygous for the recessive allele.

Lethal dominant alleles are much less common than lethal recessives. Presumably, the two kinds of alleles arise by mutation (changes to the DNA) of a sperm or egg equally often. However, if a lethal dominant allele kills an offspring before it is mature and can reproduce, the allele will not be passed on to future generations. This is in contrast to what happens to lethal recessive mutations, which are perpetuated from generation to generation by the reproduction of heterozygous carriers who have normal phenotypes.

A lethal dominant allele can escape elimination if it is late-acting, causing death at a relatively advanced age. By the time the symptoms become evident, the individual may have already transmitted the lethal allele to his or her children. For example, Huntington's disease, a degenerative disease of the nervous system, is caused by a lethal dominant allele that has no obvious phenotypic effect until the individual is about 35 to 45 years old. Once the deterioration of the nervous system begins, it is irreversible and inevitably fatal. Any child born to a parent who has the allele for Huntington's disease has a 50%  chance of inheriting the allele and the disorder. (The mating can be symbolized as Aa&#160;X&#160;aa, with A being the dominant allele that causes Huntington's disease.) Until recently, it was impossible to tell before the onset of symptoms if a person at risk for Huntington's disease had actually inherited the allele, but that has changed. Analyzing DNA samples from a large family with a high incidence of the disorder, molecular geneticists have tracked the Huntington's allele to a locus near the tip of chromosome 4 (FIGURE 14.16). It is now possible to test for the presence of the allele in an individual's genome. (The methods that make such tests possible are discussed in Chapter 20.) For those with a family history of Huntington's disease, the availability of this test poses an agonizing dilemma: Under what circumstances is it beneficial for a presently healthy person to find out whether he or she has inherited a fatal and not yet curable disease?



Click image to enlarge



Fig 14-16. Large families provide excellent case studies of human genetics. Here, Nancy Wexler, of Columbia University and the Hereditary Disease Foundation, studies a huge pedigree that traces Huntington's disease through several generations of one large family in Venezuela. Classical Mendelian analysis of this family, coupled with the techniques of molecular biology, enabled scientists to develop a test for the presence of the dominant allele that causes Huntington's disease--a test that can be used before symptoms appear. Dr. Wexler is herself at risk for developing Huntington's disease. Her mother died of the disorder, and there is a 50%  chance that Dr. Wexler inherited the dominant allele that causes the disease.

Multifactorial Disorders

The hereditary diseases we have discussed so far are sometimes described as simple Mendelian disorders because they result from certain alleles at a single genetic locus. Many more people are susceptible to diseases that have a multifactorial basis--a genetic component plus a significant environmental influence. The long list of multifactorial diseases includes heart disease, diabetes, cancer, alcoholism, and certain mental illnesses, such as schizophrenia and manic-depressive disorder. In many cases, the hereditary component is polygenic. For example, many genes affect our cardiovascular health, making some of us more prone than others to heart attacks and strokes. But our lifestyle intervenes tremendously between genotype and phenotype for cardiovascular health and other multifactorial characters. Exercise, a healthful diet, abstinence from smoking, and an ability to put stressful situations in perspective all reduce our risk of heart disease and some types of cancer.

At present, so little is understood about the genetic contributions to most multifactorial diseases that the best public health strategy is to educate people about the importance of environmental factors and to promote healthful behavior.




