
 Gene amplification, loss, or rearrangement can alter a cell's genome during an organism's lifetime

We are used to the idea that, except for rare mutations, the nucleotide sequence of an organism's DNA is constant during its lifetime. However, there are a few important exceptions in which the DNA of somatic cells is altered in a systematic way. Because these changes do not affect gametes, they are not passed on to offspring, but they can and do have major effects on gene expression within particular cells and tissues.

Gene Amplification and Selective Gene Loss

Sometimes the number of copies of a gene or gene family temporarily increases in the cells of some tissues during a particular stage of development. For instance, consider the genes for ribosomal RNA in amphibians. As in most eukaryotes, multiple copies of these genes are built into the genome of every cell (the result of gene duplication in the evolutionary past). A developing ovum, however, synthesizes a million or more additional copies of the rRNA genes, which exist in nucleoli as tiny DNA circles separate from the chromosomes. This selective replication of certain genes, called gene amplification, is a potent way of increasing expression of the rRNA genes, enabling the developing egg cell to make enormous numbers of ribosomes. These ribosomes make possible a burst of protein synthesis once the egg is fertilized. The extra copies of the rRNA genes cannot replicate further and are broken down during early embryonic development.

Gene amplification has also been observed in cancer cells exposed to high concentrations of chemotherapeutic drugs. While such drugs may kill a great many cells in a tumor, invariably some cells are resistant. These cells often contain amplified segments of DNA carrying genes conferring drug resistance. In the laboratory, increasing the concentration of such drugs leads to increasing resistance in the cell population by selecting for cells that have amplified these genes.

In certain insects, genes are selectively lost in certain tissues (although not in the cells that give rise to gametes, of course). In fact, whole chromosomes or parts of chromosomes may be eliminated from certain cells early in insect development.

Rearrangements in the Genome

More common than gene amplification or loss is the shuffling of substantial stretches of DNA. Here we are talking not about the genetic recombination that goes on in meiosis but about rearrangements that change the loci of genes in somatic cells of an organism. Such rearrangements may have powerful effects on gene expression.

Transposons and Retrotransposons. All organisms seem to have transposons, stretches of DNA that can move from one location to another within the genome. Transposons were discussed in detail in FIGURES 18.16-18.18), and transposition was mentioned as a source of scattered gene families earlier in this chapter. Recall that if a transposon "jumps" into the middle of a coding sequence of another gene, it prevents the normal functioning of the interrupted gene (FIGURE 19.4). If the transposon inserts within a sequence that is involved in regulating transcription, the transposition may increase or decrease the production of one or more proteins. In some cases, the transposon itself carries a gene that is activated when it is inserted just downstream from an active promoter. Barbara McClintock was the first to discover transposons when she found evidence for mobile genetic elements that affect the color of developing corn kernels.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 19-4. The effect of a transposon on flower color. Without the movement of a transposon, this morning glory flower would be entirely purple. The white portion of the flower (light blue-green in this photo) resulted from the movement of a transposon in the genome of one cell to a locus that determines purple flower color, destroying the function of the flower-color gene.

Recent studies have revealed that transposons actually make up over 50%  of the corn (maize) genome and 10%  of the human genome. Most of these transposons are retrotransposons, transposable elements that move within a genome by means of an RNA intermediate, a transcript of the retrotransposon DNA (FIGURE 19.5). To insert at another site, the RNA retrotransposon must be converted back to DNA. This is accomplished by the enzyme reverse transcriptase, which is encoded in the retrotransposon itself, along with an enzyme that catalyzes the insertion at a new site. Thus, reverse transcriptase can be present in cells not infected with retroviruses. (In fact, retroviruses may have evolved from escaped and packaged retrotransposons.) The Alu elements, mentioned earlier, are retrotransposons that do not code for reverse transcriptase but can move using enzymes encoded by other retrotransposons in the genome.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 19-5. Retrotransposon movement. Notice that the retrotransposition mechanism is essentially identical to part of the retrovirus reproductive cycle (see FIGURE 18.7). By replicative transposition, as shown here, a retro-transposon can populate the genome of a multicellular eukaryote in huge numbers.

Immunoglobulin Genes. In vertebrates, at least one set of genes normally undergoes permanent rearrangements of DNA segments. These rearrangements occur in the developing immune system during cellular differentiation, the specialization in cellular structure and function. Several kinds of genes become rearranged as cells of the immune system differentiate. Let's look at the genes encoding antibodies, or immunoglobulins, proteins that specifically recognize and help combat viruses, bacteria, and other invaders of the body.

Immunoglobulins are made by cells of the immune system called B lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. B lymphocytes are highly specialized, with each differentiated cell and its descendants producing one specific type of antibody that attacks a specific invader. As an unspecialized cell differentiates into a B lymphocyte, functional antibody genes are pieced together using segments from DNA regions that are physically separated in the genome of an embryonic cell (FIGURE 19.6).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 19-6. DNA rearrangement in the maturation of an immunoglobulin (antibody) gene. The joining of V, J, and C regions of DNA in random combinations plays a major role in arming the immune system with an enormous variety of antibody-producing lymphocytes.

The basic immunoglobulin molecule is represented at the bottom right of FIGURE 19.6.. It consists of four polypeptide chains held together by disulfide bridges. Each chain has two major parts: a constant (C) region, which is the same for all antibodies of a particular class, and a variable (V) region. The variable region gives a particular antibody its unique function--the ability to recognize and bind to a specific foreign molecule. In the genome of an embryonic cell, the DNA sequence coding for the constant part of an antibody polypeptide is separated by a long stretch of DNA from a location containing hundreds of segments coding for variable regions. As a B lymphocyte differentiates, a variable segment of the DNA is connected to a constant segment by the deletion of intervening DNA. This occurs by a type of genetic recombination within the DNA (remember that this is not RNA splicing!). The joined segments form the continuous sequence of nucleotides that functions as the gene for one of the immunoglobulin polypeptides. The combining of different variable and constant regions in this way creates an enormous variety of different polypeptides. And antibody diversity is increased still more by the combining of polypeptides to form complete antibody molecules. As a result, the mature immune system, with millions of subpopulations of B lymphocytes, can make millions of different kinds of antibody molecules.




