
 Guard cells mediate the photosynthesis-transpiration compromise

A leaf may transpire more than its weight in water each day. Leaves are kept from wilting by a transpiration stream in xylem vessels that flows as fast as 75 cm/min, about the speed of the tip of a second hand sweeping around a wall clock. A plant's tremendous requirement for water is part of the cost of making food by photosynthesis. Guard cells, by controlling the size of stomata, help balance the plant's need to conserve water with its requirement for photosynthesis (FIGURE 36.12).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 36-12. An open (left) and closed (right) stoma of a spider plant (Chlorophytum colosum) leaf.

The Photosynthesis-Transpiration Compromise

To make food, a plant must spread its leaves to the sun and obtain CO2 from the air. Carbon dioxide diffuses into the leaf through the stomata, and oxygen produced as a by-product of photosynthesis diffuses out of the leaf via the stomata (see FIGURE 36.10). Upon diffusing through the stomata, CO2 enters a honeycomb of air spaces formed by the irregularly shaped spongy parenchyma cells (see FIGURE 35.11). Because of the irregular shape of these cells, the internal surface area of the leaf may be 10 to 30 times greater than the external surface area we see when we look at the leaf. This structural feature of leaves supports photosynthesis by increasing exposure to CO2, but it also increases the surface area for the evaporation of water, which exits the plant freely through open stomata. About 90%  of the water a plant loses escapes through stomata, though these pores account for only 1-2%  of the external leaf surface. The waxy cuticle limits water loss through the remaining surface of the leaf.

One way to evaluate how efficiently a plant uses water is to determine its transpiration-to-photosynthesis ratio, the amount of water lost per gram of CO2 assimilated into organic material by photosynthesis. For many plant species, this ratio is about 600:1, meaning the plant transpires 600 g of water for each gram of CO2 that becomes incorporated into carbohydrate. However, corn and other plants that assimilate atmospheric CO2 by the C4 pathway have transpiration-to-photosynthesis ratios of 300:1 or less. With the same concentration of CO2 within the air spaces of the leaf, C4 plants can assimilate that CO2 at a greater rate than C3 plants can (see Chapter 10). Because water loss is the trade-off for allowing CO2 to diffuse into the leaf, the photosynthetic return for each gram of water sacrificed is greater for C4 plants, which can assimilate CO2 faster than C3 plants when stomata are partially closed.

In addition to supplying water to leaves, the transpiration stream assists in the delivery of minerals and other substances from the roots to the shoots and leaves. Transpiration also results in evaporative cooling, which can lower the temperature of a leaf by as much as 10-15&#176;C compared with the surrounding air. This prevents the leaf from reaching temperatures that could denature various enzymes involved in photosynthesis and other metabolic processes. Cacti and other desert succulents, which have low rates of transpiration, can tolerate high leaf temperatures; in this case, the loss of water due to transpiration is a greater threat than overheating.

When transpiration exceeds the delivery of water by xylem, as when the soil begins to dry out, the leaves begin to wilt as their cells lose turgor pressure (see FIGURE 36.5). The potential rate of transpiration will be greatest on a day that is sunny, warm, dry, and windy, because these are the environmental factors that increase the evaporation of water. Plants are not helpless against the elements, however, for they are capable of adjusting to their environment. In the photosynthesis-transpiration compromise, mechanisms that regulate the size of the stomatal openings strike a balance.

How Stomata Open and Close

Each stoma is flanked by a pair of guard cells, which are kidney-shaped in dicots and dumbbell-shaped in monocots. The guard cells are suspended by their epidermal neighbors over an air chamber, which leads to a honeycomb of air spaces.

Guard cells control the diameter of the stoma by changing shape, thereby widening or narrowing the gap between the two cells (FIGURE 36.13a). When guard cells take in water by osmosis, they become more turgid and swell. In most dicots, the cell walls of guard cells are not uniformly thick, and the cellulose microfibrils are oriented in a direction that causes the guard cells to buckle outward when they are turgid. This increases the size of the gap between the cells. When the cells lose water and become flaccid, they become less bowed and close the space between them. This basic mechanism also applies to the stomata of monocots.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 36-13. The mechanism of stomatal opening and closing. (a) Changes in guard cell shape and stomatal opening and closing (surface view). Guard cells of a dicot are illustrated in their turgid (stoma open) and flaccid (stoma closed) states. The pair of guard cells buckle outward when turgid. Cellulose microfibrils in the walls resist stretching and compression in the direction parallel to the microfibrils. Thus, the radial orientation of the microfibrils causes the cells to increase in length more than width when turgor increases. The two guard cells are attached at their tips, so the increase in length causes buckling. (b) Role of potassium in stomatal opening and closing. The transport of K+ (potassium ions) across the plasma membrane and tonoplast causes the turgor changes of guard cells. Stomata open when guard cells accumulate potassium (red dots), which lowers the cells' water potential and causes them to take up water by osmosis. The cells become turgid. An exodus of K+ from guard cells causes stomatal closure.

The changes in turgor pressure that open and close stomata result primarily from the reversible uptake and loss of potassium ions (K+) by the guard cells. Stomata open when guard cells actively accumulate K+ from neighboring epidermal cells (FIGURE 36.13b). This uptake of solute causes the water potential to become more negative within the guard cells, and the cells become more turgid as water enters by osmosis. Most of the K+ and water are stored in the vacuole, and thus the tonoplast also plays a role. Stomatal closing results from an exodus of K+ from guard cells, which leads to an osmotic loss of water. Regulation of aquaporins may also be involved in the swelling and shrinking of guard cells by varying the permeability of the membranes to water.

The K+ fluxes across the guard cell membrane are probably passive, being coupled to the generation of membrane potentials by proton pumps. Stomatal opening correlates with active transport of H+ out of the guard cell. The resulting voltage (membrane potential) drives K+ into the cell through specific membrane channels (see FIGURE 36.2). Plant physiologists are using a method called patch clamping to study regulation of the guard cell's proton pumps and K+ channels (FIGURE 36.14).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 36-14. A patch-clamp study of guard cell membranes. Patch clamping makes it possible to isolate a very tiny "patch" of membrane and study ion movement through a single type of channel--K+ or H+ channels, for instance. This particular experiment measures the effect of blue light, which increases H+ current across the membrane. Along with other evidence, patch-clamp studies support the hypothesis that blue light and other stimuli regulate guard cells by affecting the proton (H+) pumps of the membrane.

In general, stomata are open during the day and closed at night. This prevents the plant from needlessly losing water when it is too dark for photosynthesis. At least three cues contribute to stomatal opening at dawn. First, light itself stimulates guard cells to accumulate potassium and become turgid. This response is triggered by the illumination of a blue-light receptor in a guard cell, perhaps built into the plasma membrane. Activation of these blue-light receptors stimulates the activity of ATP-powered proton pumps in the plasma membrane of the guard cells, which in turn promotes the uptake of K+ (see FIGURE 36.14). Light may also stimulate stomatal opening by driving photosynthesis in guard cell chloroplasts, making ATP available for the active transport of hydrogen ions. (Guard cells are the only epidermal cells equipped with chloroplasts.)

A second stimulus causing stomata to open is depletion of CO2 within air spaces of the leaf, which occurs when photosynthesis begins in the mesophyll. We can actually trick a plant into opening its stomata at night by placing it in a chamber devoid of CO2.

A third cue in stomatal opening is an internal clock located in the guard cells. Even if you keep a plant in a dark closet, stomata will continue their daily rhythm of opening and closing. All eukaryotic organisms have internal clocks that somehow keep track of time and regulate cyclic processes. Cycles that have intervals of approximately 24 hours are called circadian rhythms. You will learn more about circadian rhythms and the biological clocks that control them in Chapter 39.

Environmental stresses of various kinds can cause stomata to close during the daytime. When the plant is suffering a water deficiency, guard cells may lose turgor. In addition, a hormone called abscisic acid, which is produced in the mesophyll cells in response to water deficiency, signals guard cells to close stomata. This response reduces further wilting, but it also slows down photosynthesis; this is one reason droughts reduce crop yields. High temperatures also induce stomatal closure, probably by stimulating cellular respiration and increasing CO2 concentration within the air spaces of the leaf. High temperature and excessive transpiration may combine to cause stomata to close briefly during mid-day. Thus, guard cells arbitrate the photosynthesis-transpiration compromise on a moment-to-moment basis by integrating a variety of internal and external stimuli.




