
 Immunity can be achieved naturally or artificially

Immunity conferred by recovering from an infectious disease such as chicken pox is called active immunity because it depends on the response of the infected person's own immune system. As is the case with all such infections, this immunity is naturally acquired. Active immunity can also be acquired artificially, by immunization, also known as vaccination. Vaccines include inactivated bacterial toxins, killed microbes, parts of microbes, and viable but weakened microbes. These agents can no longer cause disease, but they retain the ability to act as antigens, stimulating an immune response, and more important, immunological memory. A vaccinated person who encounters the actual pathogen will have the same quick secondary response based on memory cells as a person who has had the disease. Routine immunization of infants and children has dramatically reduced the incidence of infectious diseases such as measles and whooping cough, and has led to the eradication of smallpox, a disfiguring and often fatal viral disease. Unfortunately, not all infectious agents are easily managed by vaccination. For example, although researchers are working intensively to develop a vaccine for HIV, they face many problems, such as the antigenic variability of the virus.

Antibodies can be transferred from one individual to another, providing passive immunity. This occurs naturally when IgG antibodies of a pregnant woman cross the placenta to her fetus. In addition, IgA antibodies are passed from mother to nursing infant in breast milk, especially in the early secretions called colostrum. Passive immunity persists only as long as these antibodies last (a few weeks to a few months), but it provides protection from infections until the baby's own immune system has matured. Passive immunity can also be transferred artificially by injecting antibodies from an animal that is already immune to a disease into another animal, conferring short-term but immediate protection against that disease. Thus, for example, a person bitten by a rabid animal may be injected with antibodies from other people who have been vaccinated against rabies. This measure is important because rabies may progress rapidly, and the response to an active immunization could take too long to save the life of the victim. Actually, most people infected with rabies virus are given both passive and active immunizations: The injected antibodies fight the virus for a few weeks, and then the person's own immune response, induced by the immunization and the infection itself, takes over.




