
 Science and technology are functions of society

Science and technology are associated. In many cases, technology results from scientific discoveries applied to the development of goods and services. Watson and Crick discovered the structure of DNA through the process of science. This breakthrough sparked an explosion of scientific activity that led to a better understanding of DNA chemistry and the genetic code. These discoveries eventually made it possible to manipulate DNA, enabling genetic technologists to transplant foreign genes into microorganisms and mass-produce such valuable products as human insulin. The new biotechnology is revolutionizing the pharmaceutical industry, and DNA technology has also had an enormous impact in other areas, including agriculture and the legal profession (FIGURE 1.23). Perhaps Watson and Crick envisioned that their discovery would someday have technological applications, but that was probably not what motivated their research; nor could they have predicted exactly what the applications would be.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 1-23. Two examples of DNA technology.

Not all technology can be described as applied science. In fact, technology predates science, driven by inventive humans who built tools, crafted pots, mixed paints, designed musical instruments, and made clothing--all without necessarily understanding why their inventions worked. Science catalyzes certain technologies by complementing trial and error with more informed design. But the direction technology takes depends less on science than it does on the needs of humans and the values of society.

Technology has improved our standard of living in many ways, but not without introducing some new problems. Technology, especially technology that keeps people healthier, has enabled the human population to grow more than tenfold in the past three centuries. The environmental consequences are enormous. Acid rain, deforestation, global warming, nuclear accidents, ozone holes, toxic wastes, landscapes degraded by exploration for oil and other natural resources, and extinction of species are just a few of the repercussions from more and more people wielding more and more technology. Science can help us identify problems and provide insight about what course of action may prevent further damage. But solutions to these problems have as much to do with politics, economics, culture, and values as with science and technology.

Now that both science and technology have become such powerful functions of society, it is more important than ever to distinguish "what we would like to understand" from "what we would like to build." Scientists should not distance themselves from technology but instead try to influence how scientific discoveries are applied. And scientists have a responsibility to help educate politicians, bureaucrats, corporate leaders, and voters about how science works and about the potential benefits and hazards of specific technologies. The crucial relationship between science, technology, and society is a theme that increases the significance of any biology course.




