
 Sensory receptors transduce stimulus energy and transmit signals to the nervous system

Sensations, and the perceptions they evoke in the brain, begin with sensory reception, the detection of the energy of a stimulus by sensory cells. Most sensory receptors are specialized neurons or epithelial cells that exist singly or in groups with other cell types within sensory organs, such as the eyes and ears. Sensory receptors called exteroreceptors detect stimuli outside the body, such as heat, light, pressure, and chemicals. Other sensory receptors called interoreceptors detect stimuli within the body, such as blood pressure and body position.

All stimuli represent forms of energy, and the general function of receptor cells is to convert the energy of stimuli into changes in membrane potentials and then transmit signals to the nervous system. This task consists of four functions: sensory transduction, amplification, transmission, and integration.

Sensory Transduction

The actual detection of a stimulus involves the conversion of stimulus energy into a change in the membrane potential of a receptor cell, a process called sensory transduction. The initial response of the sensory receptor to a stimulus is a change in its membrane permeability, resulting in a graded change in membrane potential called a receptor potential. (Recall from Chapter 48 that a graded potential is a change in the voltage across the membrane that is proportional to the strength of the stimulus.) In some cases a stimulus such as pressure can stretch the membrane and increase ion flow. In other cases, specific receptor molecules on the membrane of a receptor cell open or close gates to ion channels when the stimulus is present. FIGURE 49.2 (p. 1060) illustrates the example of sugar triggering a receptor potential that functions in our sense of taste. We will examine other specific examples of sensory transduction later in the chapter.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 49-2. Sensory transduction by a taste receptor.

Amplification

The strengthening of stimulus energy that is otherwise too weak to be carried into the nervous system is called amplification. Amplification of the signal may occur in accessory structures of a complex sense organ, as when sound waves are enhanced by a factor of more than 20 before reaching the receptors of the inner ear. Amplification also may be a part of the transduction process itself. An action potential conducted from the eye to the brain has about 100,000 times as much energy as the few photons of light that triggered it. Signal transduction pathways in the receptor cells contribute to this amplification (see FIGURE 49.2).

Transmission

Once the energy in the stimulus has been transduced into a receptor potential, transmission, or the conduction of impulses to the CNS (central nervous system), can occur. In some instances, such as in the case of "pain cells," the receptor itself is actually a sensory neuron that conducts action potentials to the CNS. Other receptors are separate cells that must transmit chemical signals (neurotransmitters) across synapses to sensory neurons (see FIGURE 49.2). If the receptor also functions as the sensory neuron, the intensity of the receptor potential will affect the frequency of action potentials that travel as sensations to the CNS. For separate receptor cells, the strength of the stimulus and receptor potential affect the amount of neurotransmitter released by the receptor at its synapse with a sensory neuron, which in turn determines the frequency of action potentials generated by the sensory neuron. Many sensory neurons spontaneously generate signals at a low rate. Therefore, a stimulus does not really switch the production of action potentials on or off; it modulates their frequency (FIGURE 49.2 illustrates this phenomenon). In this way the CNS is sensitive not only to the presence or absence of a stimulus but also to changes in stimulus intensity.

Integration

The processing of information, or integration, begins as soon as information is first received. Signals from receptors are integrated through the summation of graded potentials, as are those within the nervous system. One type of integration by receptor cells is sensory adaptation, a decrease in responsiveness during continued stimulation (not to be confused with the term adaptation as used in an evolutionary context). Without sensory adaptation, you would feel every beat of your heart and every bit of clothing on your body. Receptors are selective in the information they send to the CNS, and adaptation reduces the likelihood that a continuous stimulus will be transmitted.

Another important aspect of sensory integration is the sensitivity of the receptors. The threshold for transduction by receptor cells varies with conditions. For example, the thresholds of glucose receptors in the human mouth can vary over several orders of magnitude of sugar concentration as both the general state of nutrition and the amount of sugar in the diet change.

The integration of sensory information occurs at all levels within the nervous system, and the cellular actions just described are only the first steps. Complex receptors such as the eyes have higher levels of integration as signals converge on sensory nerves, and the CNS further processes all incoming signals.




