
 The exponential model of population growth describes an idealized population in an unlimited environment

Imagine a hypothetical population consisting of a few individuals living in an ideal, unlimited environment. Under these conditions, there are no restrictions on the abilities of individuals to harvest energy, grow, and reproduce, aside from the inherent physiological limitations that are the result of their life history. The population will increase in size with every birth and with the immigration of individuals from other populations and decrease in size with every death and with the emigration of individuals out of the population. For simplicity, let's ignore the effects of immigration and emigration (a more complex formulation would certainly include these factors). We can define a change in population size during a fixed time interval with the following verbal equation: 

Using mathematical notation, we can express this relationship more concisely. If N represents population size and t represents time, then DN is the change in population size and Dt is the time interval (appropriate to the life span or generation time of the species) over which we are evaluating population growth. (The Greek letter delta, D, indicates change, such as change in time.) We can now rewrite the verbal equation as 

where B is the number of births in the population during the time interval and D is the number of deaths.

We can now convert the simple model just presented into one in which births and deaths are expressed as the average number of births and deaths per individual during the specified time interval. Let b represent the per capita birth rate, the number of offspring produced per unit time by an average member of the population. If, for example, a population of 1,000 individuals experiences 34 births per year, then the annual per capita birth rate is 34/1000, or 0.034. If we know the per capita birth rate and death rate, we can calculate the expected number of births and deaths in a population of any size. For example, if we know that the annual per capita birth rate is 0.034 and the population size is 500, we can use the formula B = bN to calculate the number of births expected in that population per year: 

Similarly, the per capita death rate, symbolized as d, allows us to calculate the expected number of deaths per unit time in a population of any size. If d = 0.016 per year, we would expect 16 deaths per year in a population of 1,000 individuals. (Using the formula D = dN, how many deaths would you expect per year if d = 0.010 annually in populations of 500, 700, and 1,700?) For natural populations or those in the laboratory, the per capita birth rates and death rates can be calculated from estimates of population size and data given in life tables and reproductive tables (see, for example, TABLE 52.1andTABLE 52.2).

We can revise the population growth equation again, this time using per capita birth rates and death rates rather than the numbers of births and deaths: 

One final simplification is in order. Population ecologists are concerned with overall changes in population size, using r to identify the difference in the per capita birth rates and death rates: 

This value, the per capita growth rate, tells whether a population is actually growing (positive value of r) or declining (negative value of r). Zero population growth (ZPG) occurs when the per capita birth rates and death rates are equal (r = 0). Note that births and deaths still occur in the population, but they balance each other exactly. (Later in this chapter, we will discuss the relevance of ZPG for the human population and the factors preventing the human population from leveling off.)

Using the per capita growth rate, we rewrite the equation for change in population size as 

Finally, most ecologists use the notation of differential calculus to express population growth in terms of instantaneous growth rates: 

If you have not yet studied calculus, don't be intimidated by the form of the last equation; it is essentially the same as the previous one, except that the time intervals Dt are very short and are expressed in the equation as dt. (Do not confuse this use of d to symbolize very small change with our earlier use of d to represent per capita death rate.)

We started this section by describing a population living under ideal conditions, where organisms are constrained only by their life history. In such a situation, the population grows rapidly, because all members have access to abundant food and are free to reproduce at their physiological capacity. Population increase under these ideal conditions is called exponential population growth, or geometric population growth. Under these conditions the per capita growth rate may assume the maximum growth rate for the species, called the intrinsic rate of increase, denoted as rmax. And the equation for exponential population growth is then: 

The size of a population that is growing exponentially increases rapidly, resulting in a J-shaped growth curve when population size is plotted over time (FIGURE 52.8). Although the intrinsic rate of increase is constant as the population grows, the population actually accumulates more new individuals per unit of time when it is large than when it is small; thus, the curves in FIGURE 52.8 get progressively steeper over time. This occurs because population growth depends on N as well as r, and larger populations experience more births (and deaths) than small ones growing at the same per capita rate. It is also clear from FIGURE 52.8 that a population with a higher intrinsic rate of increase (dN/dt = 1.0N) will grow faster than one with a lower rate of increase (dN/dt 5 = 0.5N).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 52-8. Population growth predicted by the exponential model. The exponential growth model predicts unlimited population increase under conditions of unlimited resources. This graph compares growth in populations with two different values of r: 1.0 and 0.5.

The J-shaped curve of exponential growth is characteristic of some populations that are introduced into a new or unfilled environment or whose numbers have been drastically reduced by a catastrophic event and are rebounding. For example, FIGURE 52.9 illustrates exponential population growth in the whooping crane, an endangered species now recovering from the impact of habitat loss due to agriculture.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 52-9. Example of exponential population growth in nature. The whooping crane is an endangered species that has been recovering from near extinction since 1940. Counts of adults are made annually on the wintering grounds at Aransas, Texas. In the year 2000-2001, there were 179 birds in the wintering population in Texas, the population having declined slightly from the preceding year. The overall average rate of increase has been 4%  per year since the 1950s.




