
 Primate evolution provides a context for understanding human origins

We have tracked vertebrate evolution through the mammalian orders and can now begin to trace our own specific ancestry. Order Primates includes Homo sapiens and its closest kin. We are primates.

Some General Primate Characteristics

Primates are difficult to define unambiguously in terms of morphological attributes, but most primates have hands and feet adapted for grasping, and, relative to other mammals, they have large brains and short jaws, giving them a flat face. Primates have forward-looking eyes, close together on the front of the face. They also have flat nails on their digits rather than the narrow claws of other mammals. There are other changes in the hands and feet, such as the evolution of the skin ridges on fingers (these account for our fingerprints). Primates, perhaps related to their large brains, also have relatively well-developed parental care and relatively complex social behavior.

The earliest primates were probably tree dwellers, shaped through natural selection to the demands of living in the trees. For example, the grasping hands and feet of primates are adaptations for hanging on to tree branches. All modern primates, except Homo, have a big toe that is widely separated from the other toes, enabling them to grasp onto branches with their feet. A similar separation of the thumb from the other fingers evolved in the hands of primates. Humans have a fully opposable thumb; that is, we can touch the ventral surface (fingerprint side) of the tip of all four fingers with the ventral surface of the thumb of the same hand. The thumb is relatively mobile and separate from the fingers in all primates, but a fully opposable thumb is found only in anthropoid primates (monkeys, apes, and humans). The opposable thumb, like the grasping foot, evolved first for gripping branches. In monkeys and apes, the opposable thumb functions in a grasping "power grip," but in humans, the opposable thumb has adaptations that enable more precise manipulation; we have a distinctive bone structure at the base of our thumbs associated with our "precision grip." The unique dexterity of humans represents descent with modification from ancestral hands adapted for life in the trees. Some of the other primate features also originated as adaptations for tree dwelling. For instance, the overlapping fields of vision of the two eyes enhance depth perception, an obvious advantage when brachiating (swinging). Excellent eye-hand coordination is also important for arboreal maneuvering. Humans, of course, do not live in trees, but we retain in modified form many of the traits that originally evolved there.

Modern Primates

The two subgroups of the Primates are the Prosimii and Anthropoidea. The prosimians ("premonkeys") probably resemble early arboreal primates (FIGURE 34.34). The lemurs of Madagascar and the lorises, pottos, and tarsiers that live in tropical Africa and southern Asia are examples of prosimians. The anthropoids include monkeys, apes, and humans. The oldest known anthropoid fossils, discovered in China in mid-Eocene strata about 45 million years old, support the hypothesis that tarsiers are the prosimians most closely related to anthropoids (FIGURE 34.35, p. 708).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-34. Prosimians: crowned lemurs.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-35. A phylogenetic tree of primates. The fossil record indicates that the prosimian and anthropoid lineages were diverging by about 50 million years ago. Among the anthropoids, New World monkeys, Old World monkeys, and the apes (represented today by several species of gibbons, the orangutan, the gorilla, and chimpanzees) have been evolving on separate lineages for over 40 million years. Molecular evidence shows that chimpanzees are more closely related to humans than are any other apes. The time of divergence of the hominid lineage (human branch of the evolutionary tree) is somewhere between 5 and 7 million years ago.

The fossil record indicates that by 40 million years ago, monkeys were established both in the Old World (in Africa and Asia) and in the New World (in South America). By that time, South America and Africa had drifted apart. The first monkeys probably evolved in the Old World, and may have reached South America by rafting on logs or other debris from Africa. What is certain is that New World monkeys and Old World monkeys underwent separate adaptive radiations during their many millions of years of separation (FIGURE 34.36). All New World monkeys are arboreal, whereas Old World monkeys include ground-dwelling as well as arboreal species. Most monkeys of both groups are diurnal (active during the day) and usually live in bands held together by social behavior.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-36. New World monkeys and Old World monkeys compared. (a) New World monkeys, such as spider monkeys, squirrel monkeys, and capuchins, have prehensile tails and nostrils that open to the sides. (b) Old World monkeys lack prehensile tails, and their nostrils open down-ward. The tough seat pad is unique to the Old World group, which includes macaques, mandrills, baboons, and rhesus monkeys.

In addition to monkeys, the anthropoid suborder also includes the four genera of apes, shown in FIGURE 34.37: Hylobates (gibbons), Pongo (orangutans), Gorilla (gorillas), and Pan (chimpanzees and bonobos). Modern apes are confined exclusively to tropical regions of the Old World; the ancestors of the apes evolved from Old World monkeys about 25-30 million years ago. With the exception of gibbons, modern apes are larger than monkeys, with relatively long arms and short legs and no tails. Although all the apes are capable of brachiation (traveling by swinging from branch to branch in trees), only gibbons and orangutans are primarily arboreal. Social organization varies among the genera of apes; gorillas and chimpanzees are highly social. Apes have larger brains proportionate to body size than monkeys, and their behavior is more flexible.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-37. Apes. (a) Gibbons, such as this white-handed gibbon, which is brachiating, have long arms and are among the most acrobatic of all primates. These Asian primates are also the only monogamous apes. (b) The orangutan is a shy and solitary ape that lives in the rain forests of Sumatra and Borneo. Orangutans spend most of their time in trees, but they do venture onto the forest floor occasionally. Note the foot adapted for grasping and the opposable thumb. (c) Gorillas are the largest apes, with some males almost 2 m tall and weighing about 200 kg. These herbivores are confined to Africa, where they usually live in small groups of about 10 to 20 individuals. (d) Chimpanzees live in tropical Africa. They feed and sleep in trees but also spend a great deal of time on the ground. Chimpanzees are intelligent, communicative, and social. (e) Bonobos, smaller than chimpanzees, survive today only in the African nation of Congo.




