
 Ribosomes build a cell's proteins

Ribosomes, particles made of ribosomal RNA and protein, are the organelles that carry out protein synthesis; each is composed of two subunits (FIGURE 7.10). Cells that have high rates of protein synthesis have a particularly large number of ribosomes. For example, a human pancreas cell has a few million ribosomes. Not surprisingly, cells active in protein synthesis also have prominent nucleoli. (Keep in mind that both nucleoli and ribosomes, unlike most other organelles, are not enclosed in membrane.)



Click image to enlarge



Fig 7-10. Ribosomes. (a) This electron micrograph of part of a pancreas cell shows many ribosomes, both free (in the cytosol) and bound (to the endoplasmic reticulum). The bound ribosomes of pancreas cells make a number of secretory proteins, including the hormone insulin and digestive enzymes. Bound ribosomes also make proteins destined for insertion into membranes or the interiors of other organelles. Free ribosomes mainly make proteins that remain dissolved in the cytosol. Bound and free ribosomes are identical and can alternate between these two roles. (b) This simplified diagram of a ribosome shows its two subunits.

Ribosomes build proteins in two cytoplasmic locales (see FIGURE 7.10). Free ribosomes are suspended in the cytosol, while bound ribosomes are attached to the outside of the endoplasmic reticulum or nuclear envelope. Most of the proteins made by free ribosomes will function within the cytosol; examples are enzymes that catalyze the first steps of sugar breakdown. Bound ribosomes generally make proteins that are destined either for insertion into membranes, for packaging within certain organelles such as lysosomes, or for export from the cell (secretion). Cells that specialize in protein secretion--for instance, the cells of the pancreas and other glands that secrete digestive enzymes--frequently have a high proportion of bound ribosomes. Bound and free ribosomes are structurally identical and can alternate between the two roles; the cell adjusts the relative numbers of each as its metabolism changes. You will learn more about ribosome structure and function in Chapter 17.




