
 Diploidy and balanced polymorphism preserve variation

What prevents natural selection from extinguishing a population's variation by culling unfavorable genotypes? The tendency for natural selection to reduce variation is countered by mechanisms that preserve or restore variation.

Diploidy

The diploid nature of most eukaryotes hides a considerable amount of genetic variation from selection in the form of recessive alleles in heterozygotes. Recessive alleles that are less favorable than their dominant counterparts, or even harmful in the present environment, can persist in a population through their propagation by heterozygous individuals. This latent variation is exposed to selection only when both parents carry the same recessive allele and combine two copies in one zygote. This happens only rarely if the frequency of the recessive allele is very low. The rarer the recessive allele, the greater the degree of protection from natural selection. Heterozygote protection maintains a huge pool of alleles that may not be suitable for present conditions but that could bring new benefits when the environment changes.

Balanced Polymorphism

Selection itself may preserve variation at some gene loci. This ability of natural selection to maintain stable frequencies of two or more phenotypic forms in a population is called balanced polymorphism. Natural selection preserves variation by two mechanisms. One such mechanism is heterozygote advantage. If individuals who are heterozygous at a particular locus have greater survivorship and reproductive success than any type of homozygote, then two or more alleles will be maintained at that locus by natural selection.

An example of heterozygote advantage is seen at the locus in humans for one chain of hemoglobin, the protein of red blood cells that transports oxygen. A specific recessive allele at that locus causes sickle-cell disease in homozygous individuals (see FIGURE 5.19 and FIGURE 14.15). Heterozygotes, however, are resistant to malaria, an important advantage in tropical regions, where that disease is a major cause of death. The environment in these regions favors the heterozygotes over homozygous dominant individuals, who are susceptible to malaria, and homozygous recessive individuals, who are harmed by sickle-cell disease. The frequency of the sickle-cell allele in Africa is generally highest in areas where the malaria parasite is most com mon (FIGURE 23.10). In some tribes, the recessive allele accounts for 20%  of the hemoglobin loci in the gene pool, a very high frequency for an allele that is disastrous in homozygotes. But at this frequency (q =0.2), 32%  of the population consists of heterozygotes resistant to malaria (2pq), and only 4%  of the population suffers from sickle-cell disease (q2).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 23-10. Mapping malaria and the sickle-cell allele.

A second mechanism promoting balanced polymorphism is frequency-dependent selection, in which the survival and reproduction of any one morph declines if that phenotypic form becomes too common in the population. The relationships between parasites and their hosts may involve such frequency-dependent selection. Internal parasites generally recognize cells of their hosts by binding specifically to receptor molecules on the host cells. Imagine a host population with variation in receptor molecules for a particular parasite. Let's say that an individual host has either receptor A or receptor B on its cells. If the parasite recognizes receptor A as a signal to penetrate host cells, then natural selection will favor those individuals in the host population that have receptor B--the individuals less susceptible to infection by this parasite. The frequency of individuals with B receptors increases in the population. But the parasite population is also evolving by natural selection. Parasites that recognize what is now the most frequent variant of hosts, those with the B receptor, become favored and their frequency increases. This adaptation stimulates a new counteradaptation of the host population, with individuals having the A receptor again gaining advantage. The teeter-totter effect of frequency-dependent selection helps maintain a repertoire of variants in populations. In the year 2000, researchers reported an example of such frequency-dependent selection in populations of snails infected by a parasitic worm (FIGURE 23.11).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 23-11. Frequency-dependent selection in a host-parasite relationship. The bar graph compares the rates at which a parasitic worm infects five different clones that researchers collected from Lake Porerua in New Zealand. (This snail population exists as diverse clones because the snails reproduce asexually.) Infection rates are higher for common clones than for a less common clone, suggesting that frequency-dependent selection helps maintain polymorphism in the snail population.

Neutral Variation

Some of the genetic variations observed in populations are probably trivial in their impact on reproductive success. The diversity of human fingerprints is an example of what is called neutral variation, which seems to confer no selective advantage for some individuals over others. Much of the protein and DNA variation detectable by methods such as electrophoresis may represent chemical "fingerprints" that are neutral in their adaptive qualities. The relative frequencies of neutral variations will not be affected by natural selection; some neutral alleles will increase in the gene pool and others will decrease by the chance effects of genetic drift.

There is no consensus among evolutionary biologists on how much genetic variation is neutral or even if any variation can be considered truly neutral. Variations that appear to be neutral may in fact influence survival and reproductive success in ways that are difficult to measure. It is possible to show that a particular allele is detrimental, but it is impossible to demonstrate that an allele brings no benefits at all to an organism. Furthermore, a variation may be neutral in one environment but not in another. We can never know the degree to which genetic variation is neutral. But we can be certain that even if only a fraction of the extensive variation in a gene pool significantly affects the organisms, that is still an enormous reservoir of raw material for natural selection and the adaptive evolution it causes.




