
 Physical support on land depends on adaptations of body proportions and posture

An engineer designing a bridge or tall building must take into account the effects of changes in size, or scale. An increase in size from a small-scale model to the real thing has a significant effect on building design. Physical laws dictate that the strength of a building support depends on its cross-sectional area, which increases as the square of its diameter. In sharp contrast, the strain on the supports depends on the building's weight, which increases as the cube of its height or other linear dimension. In common with a bridge or a building, an animal's body "design" must account for the greater demand for support that comes with increasing size. Consistent with physical laws, a large animal, such as an elephant, has very different body proportions than a small animal, such as a mouse. Imagine a mouse, with its very slender legs, scaled up to elephant size. If the imaginary animal kept its mouselike body proportions, its legs would buckle under its weight.

In simply applying the building analogy, we might predict the size of an elephant's leg bones to be directly proportional to the strain imposed by its body weight. However, our prediction would be inaccurate; an animal's body is complex and nonrigid, and the building analogy only partly explains the relationship between animal body design and support. The size of an animal's legs relative to its body size is only part of the story. It turns out that body posture--the position of the legs relative to the main body--is a more important structural feature in supporting body weight, at least in mammals and birds (FIGURE 49.29). Muscles and tendons (connective tissue joining muscles to bones), which hold the legs of elephants, coyotes, humans, and other large mammals relatively straight and under the body, bear most of the load.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 49-29. Posture helps support large land vertebrates. A coyote stands, walks, and runs with most of its weight supported by muscles and tendons, which hold its legs directly under the body.




