
 Bryophytes provide many ecological and economic benefits

Wind dispersal of lightweight spores has distributed bryophytes around the world. These plants are particularly common and diverse in moist alpine, boreal, temperate, and tropical forests, as well as wetlands, where they form essential habitats for a variety of tiny animals. Some mosses even inhabit such extreme environments as mountaintops, arctic and antarctic tundra, and deserts; similarly harsh habitats likely challenged the earliest plants. Mosses are able to exist in very cold or dry habitats because many are able to lose most of their body water without dying, then rehydrate and reactivate their cells when moisture again becomes available. In contrast, few vascular plants can survive the same degree of desiccation. Moreover, phenolic compounds in moss cell walls absorb damaging levels of UV and other short-wavelength radiation present in deserts or at high altitudes and latitudes.

One moss genus is especially abundant and widespread. Sphagnum is a wetland moss that forms extensive deposits of undecayed organic material known as peat. Thus, Sphagnum is also called peat moss. Boggy regions dominated by this moss are known as peat bogs (FIGURE 29.19), and extensive high-latitude boreal regions occupied by Sphagnum are among the wetlands called peatlands. Sphagnum and the peat formed from it do not decay readily because of the resistant phenolic compounds embedded in the moss's cell walls. Sphagnum moss also secretes acidic and phenolic compounds that may reduce bacterial activity. Low temperatures and nutrient levels typical of peat bogs also inhibit microbial decay.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 29-19. Sphagnum, or peat moss.

The world's peatlands store an estimated 400 billion tons of organic carbon. As carbon reservoirs, peatlands play an important role in stabilizing Earth's atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations, and hence climate (the role of atmospheric CO2 in climate is discussed in Chapter 54).

In the past, Sphagnum moss was widely used by aboriginal people for diapers and during wartime as a naturally antiseptic packing material for wounds. Today, Sphagnum is widely harvested for use as a soil conditioner and for packing plant roots during shipment. The usefulness of this moss is based on the presence of large, dead, water-absorbing cells, in addition to green, photosynthetic cells (see FIGURE 29.19c). This enables dry moss to absorb 20 times its weight in water. Some ecologists are concerned that overharvesting of Sphagnum will reduce its beneficial ecological effects.

Bryophytes were probably Earth's only plants for the first 100 million years that terrestrial communities existed. Then vegetation began to take on a taller profile with the evolution of vascular plants.




