
 The nucleus contains a eukaryotic cell's genetic library

The nucleus contains most of the genes in the eukaryotic cell (some genes are located in mitochondria and chloroplasts). It is generally the most conspicuous organelle in a eukaryotic cell, averaging about 5 mm in diameter. The nuclear envelope encloses the nucleus (FIGURE 7.9), separating its contents from the cytoplasm.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 7-9. The nucleus and its envelope. Within the nucleus is chromatin, consisting of DNA and proteins. When a cell prepares to divide, individual chromosomes become visible as the chromatin condenses. The nucleolus functions in ribosome synthesis. The nuclear envelope, which consists of two membranes separated by a narrow space, is perforated with pores and lined by a nuclear lamina.

The nuclear envelope is a double membrane. The two membranes, each a lipid bilayer with associated proteins, are separated by a space of about 20-40 nm. The envelope is perforated by pores that are about 100 nm in diameter. At the lip of each pore, the inner and outer membranes of the nuclear envelope are fused. An intricate protein structure called a pore complex lines each pore and regulates the entry and exit of certain large macromolecules and particles. Except at the pores, the nuclear side of the envelope is lined by the nuclear lamina, a netlike array of protein filaments (intermediate filaments) that maintains the shape of the nucleus. There is also much evidence for a nuclear matrix, a framework of fibers extending throughout the nuclear interior. (We will examine possible functions of the nuclear lamina and matrix in Chapter 19.)

Within the nucleus, the DNA is organized along with proteins into a fibrous material called chromatin. Stained chromatin usually appears through both light microscopes and electron microscopes as a diffuse mass. As a cell prepares to divide (reproduce), however, the thin chromatin fibers coil up (condense), becoming thick enough to be discerned as separate structures called chromosomes. Each eukaryotic species has a characteristic number of chromosomes. A typical human cell, for example, has 46 chromosomes in its nucleus; the exceptions are the sex cells (eggs and sperm), which have only 23 chromosomes in humans.

A prominent structure within the nondividing nucleus is the nucleolus, which appears through the electron microscope as a mass of densely stained granules and fibers adjoining part of the chromatin. Here a special type of RNA called ribosomal RNA is synthesized and assembled with proteins imported from the cytoplasm into the main components of ribosomes, called ribosomal subunits. These subunits then pass through the nuclear pores to the cytoplasm, where they can combine to form ribosomes. Sometimes there are two or more nucleoli; the number depends on the species and the stage in the cell's reproductive cycle.

As we saw in FIGURE 5.28, the nucleus directs protein synthesis by synthesizing messenger RNA (mRNA) and sending it to the cytoplasm via the nuclear pores. The mRNA is made according to instructions provided by the DNA (as is ribosomal RNA). Once an mRNA molecule reaches the cytoplasm, ribosomes translate its genetic message into the primary structure of a specific polypeptide. This process of translating genetic information is described in detail in Chapter 17.




