
 Nervous systems show diverse patterns of organization

While there is remarkable uniformity in how nerve cells function throughout the animal kingdom, there is great diversity in how nervous systems are organized. What distinguishes the various levels of complexity among animal nervous systems is not so much their basic building blocks, the neurons themselves, but how these cells are networked. These networks are responsible for the feats of sensing and acting we will examine in Chapter 49 and for the animal behaviors we will describe in Chapter 51.

Some simple multicellular animals lack a nervous system altogether; sponges, for instance, have no cells specialized for impulse conduction (see FIGURE 33.3). The simplest animals with nervous systems, the cnidarians, have bodies organized around radially symmetrical cavities that ingest and expel food (see FIGURE 33.4). In some of these animals, such as the hydra shown in FIGURE 48.15a, the neurons controlling the contractions and expansions of these cavities are arranged in diffuse nerve nets. Nerve nets also play a role as components of the nervous system of more complex animals. For example, the sea star shown in FIGURE 48.15b has a nerve ring connected to radial nerves that link to a nerve net in each arm, allowing for more complex movement patterns than the hydra. And a netlike system of neurons in the walls of our intestines controls the smooth muscles that function in peristalsis (see Chapter 41).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-15. Diversity in nervous systems.

Greater complexity of nervous systems and more complex behavior evolved with cephalization, which included the clustering of sensory neurons and other nerve cells to form a small brain near the anterior (head) end and mouth region in animals with elongated, bilaterally symmetrical bodies. In relatively simple cephalized animals such as the planarian shown in FIGURE 48.15c, small brains and longitudinal nerve cords, which control the animals- directional movements, constitute the first clearly defined central nervous system (CNS). In more complex invertebrates such as insects and mollusks, behavior is regulated by more complicated brains and ventral nerve cords containing segmentally arranged ganglia (FIGURE 48.15e, f, and g). The longitudinal nerve cord of vertebrates, such as the salamander shown in FIGURE 48.15h, runs along the dorsal rather than the ventral surface of the body and does not contain segmental ganglia (though there are segmental ganglia lateral to the nerve cord--see FIGURE 48.2).

Mollusks are good examples of how nervous system organization correlates with how various animals live and interact with their environments. Sessile or slow-moving mollusks such as clams or chitons have little or no cephalization and relatively simple sense organs (FIGURE 48.15f). In contrast, cephalopod mollusks (squid and octopuses) have the most sophisticated nervous systems of any invertebrates, rivaling even those of some vertebrates. The large brain of a squid or octopus, accompanied by large, image-forming eyes and rapid signaling along giant axons, correlates well with the active predatory life of these animals (FIGURE 48.15g). Researchers have demonstrated in laboratory experiments that octopuses can learn to discriminate among visual patterns and perform complex tasks.

Now that we have surveyed nervous systems of varying complexity, let's take a closer look at the structure and function of nervous systems in our own subphylum.




