
 The extracellular matrix (ECM) of animal cells functions in support, adhesion, movement, and regulation

Although animal cells lack walls akin to those of plant cells, they do have an elaborate extracellular matrix (ECM) (FIGURE 7.29). The main ingredients of the ECM are glycoproteins secreted by the cells. (Recall that glycoproteins are proteins with covalently bonded carbohydrate, usually short chains of sugars.) The most abundant glycoprotein in the ECM of most animal cells is collagen, which forms strong fibers outside the cells. In fact, collagen accounts for about half of the total protein in the human body. The collagen fibers are embedded in a network woven from proteoglycans, which are glycoproteins of another class. Proteoglycan molecules are especially rich in carbohydrate--up to 95% --and they can form large complexes, as shown in FIGURE 7.29. Some cells are attached to the ECM by still other kinds of glycoproteins, most commonly fibronectins. Fibronectins bind to receptor proteins called integrins that are built into the plasma membrane. Integrins span the membrane and bind on their cytoplasmic side to microfilaments of the cytoskeleton. Thus, integrins are in a position to transmit changes in the ECM to the cytoskeleton, and vice versa--to integrate changes occurring outside and inside the cell.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 7-29. Extracellular matrix (ECM) of an animal cell. The molecular composition and structure of the ECM varies from one cell type to another. In this example, three different types of glycoproteins are present: proteoglycan, collagen, and fibronectin. Collagen fibers are embedded in proteoglycan complexes, which consist of proteoglycan molecules extending like little trees from long polysaccharide molecules. Fibronectin molecules are the adhesive that attaches the ECM to the plasma membrane of the cell, by connecting to membrane proteins called integrins.

Current research on fibronectins and integrins is revealing the influential role of the extracellular matrix in the lives of cells. Communicating with a cell through integrins, the ECM can regulate a cell's behavior. For example, some cells in a developing embryo migrate along specific pathways by matching the orientation of their microfilaments to the "grain" of fibers in the extracellular matrix. Researchers are also learning that the extracellular matrix around a cell can influence the activity of genes in the nucleus. Information about the ECM probably reaches the nucleus by a combination of mechanical and chemical signaling pathways. Mechanical signaling involves fibronectins, integrins, and the cytoskeleton. Changes in the cytoskeleton may in turn trigger chemical signaling pathways inside the cell. In this way, the extracellular matrix of a particular tissue could help coordinate the behavior of all the cells within that tissue. Direct connections between cells also function in this coordination, as we discuss next.




