
 Natural selection favors mating behavior that maximizes the quantity or quality of mating partners

Reproductive behavior includes seeking mates, choosing among potential mates, competing for mates, and, in some species, caring for offspring. Behavioral ecology and its offshoot, sociobiology, seek to explain mating behaviors as outcomes of natural selection reinforcing those variations that enhance reproductive success.

Courtship

Courtship consists of behavior patterns that lead up to copulation (or to gamete release in species with external fertilization; see Chapter 46). In many species, courtship consists of a series of displays and movements by either the male, the female, or both. The elaborate courtship behavior of stickleback fish provides a classic example (FIGURE 51.23). Stickleback courtship lasts only a few minutes, but some animal species court for days or even months. Of what possible benefit to the individual is such elaborate courtship behavior? Put another way, how can natural selection explain the evolution of courtship behavior? Part of the answer is that courtship enables animals to identify potential mates of the same species. This would explain why courtship patterns are often especially elaborate and distinct when two closely related species occupy the same area. Also, courtship can help establish that a potential mate is physiologically ready to reproduce. In sticklebacks, for example, courtship succeeds only if the female displays a swollen belly, which is full of eggs, and the male demonstrates that he has built a nest (see FIGURE 51.23). But if courtship were only a matter of identifying a potential partner that is physiologically competent to reproduce, then such behavior could be much simpler than it is in many species. Much of courtship behavior apparently evolved because of sexual selection, an evolutionary process that we introduced in Chapter 23.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 51-23. Courtship behavior in the three-spined stickleback. Males are strongly territorial, defending an area in which they have built a nest. If a gravid (egg-carrying) female approaches, her swollen belly inhibits the male's aggressive behavior and elicits zigzag swimming in the male. This entices the female to swim closer, which in turn stimulates the male to swim to the nest and stick his snout inside. This action stimulates the female to wriggle into the tunnel. The male then nuzzles her tail, which stimulates her to spawn, after which she swims out the other end of the nest. The male then enters and deposits sperm on the eggs, after which he immediately and quite aggressively drives the female out of the area, apparently because she lacks the swollen belly that would inhibit his aggression.

The hypothesis that a courtship behavior is an evolutionary product of sexual selection predicts a basic difference between the mating behaviors of males and females. The difference follows from the potential partners' relative amounts of parental investment in offspring. Parental investment refers to the time and resources an individual must spend to produce and nurture offspring. Eggs are generally much larger than sperm and are thus more energetically expensive to produce. Eutherian (placental) mammals produce relatively small eggs (though still much bigger than sperm), but the mother invests considerable time and resources in carrying and nourishing the offspring before their birth. In most species, a male's lower investment per offspring, compared to a female's, means that he can maximize his reproductive output by fertilizing the eggs of many females. Thus, a male's reproductive success is often proportional to his number of partners. This explains why competition among males for mates is common in the animal kingdom. In contrast, the reproductive success of females is less often dependent on the number of partners than it is on the vigor of the limited number of offspring she can produce. This explains why the females of many animal species are so selective in their choices of mates. Healthy mates provide the best opportunity for producing healthy offspring.

This distinction based on parental investment--male competition/female choice--can account for many of the differences between males and females in their morphology and courtship behavior. In some cases, male competition has probably contributed to the evolution of agonistic behaviors and even weapons such as deer antlers, which the males use to compete for mates. But female choice seems to have an even more powerful effect in shaping the secondary sexual characteristics and courtship behaviors of males. For example, the showy displays of peacocks and other male birds during mating season have little to do with direct male-male competition and much to do with advertising robust health to choosy females (see FIGURE 23.16).

As another example of how female choice affects the evolution of males, consider the courtship behavior of stalk-eyed flies (FIGURE 51.24). The eyes of these insects are at the tips of stalks, which are longer in males than in females. During courtship, a male presents himself to a female, front end on. Researchers have documented that females are more likely to mate with those males that have relatively long eyestalks; thus, female choice has been a strong selection factor in the evolution of long eyestalks in males. But why would the females favor this seemingly arbitrary trait? Behavioral ecologists have correlated certain genetic disorders in the male flies with an inability to develop long eyestalks. Such studies support the hypothesis that females are basing their mate choices on characteristics that are indicators of male quality.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 51-24. Male stalk-eyed fly. These Malaysian insects have eyes at the end of elongated stalks. Females usually select mates with relatively long eyestalks. The stalks are shorter in males with certain genetic disorders.

Of course, the distinction between male competition and female choice becomes blurry if you consider that males compete by vying for female choice and not just by engaging in male-male confrontations. And in some species, it is the females who compete directly for mates and the males who are the more selective sex in choosing mates. This is common in species where males provide most of the care for offspring, which raises their parental investment. In the case of sticklebacks, both partners are heavily invested in offspring--the female in her costly production of eggs and the male in his investment in the building and protection of the nest. If you take another look at FIGURE 51.23, you will see that the female choice focuses on courtship signals that advertise a male's ability to provide parental care.

Thus, the specifics of courtship behavior are tied to the natural history of the particular species. But the fascinating variety of dance steps, songs, and display organs are all connected by a comprehensive theory of courtship as an evolutionary product of sexual selection. According to this theory, specific courtship behaviors, like other social behaviors, evolve because they are practiced by the most reproductively successful individuals, which increases the representation of the genes for these behaviors in populations.

Mating Systems

The mating relationship between males and females varies a great deal from species to species. In many species, mating is promiscuous, with no strong pair-bonds or lasting relationships. In species where the mates remain together for a longer period, the relationship may be monogamous (one male mating with one female) or polygamous (an individual of one sex mating with several of the other). Polygamous relationships most often involve a single male and many females, called polygyny, which can be explained in terms of a difference in parental investment. However, in some species, a single female mates with several males, a relationship called polyandry.

The needs of the young are an important ultimate factor in the evolution of mating systems. Most newly hatched birds cannot care for themselves and require a large, continuous food supply that one parent may not be able to provide. In such cases, a male may ultimately leave more viable offspring by helping a single mate than by going off to seek more mates. This may explain why most birds are monogamous. In birds with young that feed and care for themselves almost immediately after hatching, there is less need for parents to stay together. Males of these species can maximize their reproductive success by seeking other mates, and polygyny is relatively common in such birds. In the case of mammals, the lactating female is often the only food source for the young; males usually play no role. And in species where the males protect the females and young, they typically take care of many at once in a harem.

Another factor that influences mating systems and parental care is certainty of paternity. Young born or eggs laid by a female definitely contain the female's genes. But even within a normally monogamous relationship, these young may have been fathered by a male other than the female's usual mate. The certainty of paternity is relatively low in most species with internal fertilization because the acts of mating and birth (or mating and egg laying) are separated over time. This could explain why exclusively male parental care occurs in very few species of birds and mammals. However, certainty of paternity is much higher when egg laying and mating occur together, as in external fertilization. This may explain why parental care in aquatic invertebrates, fishes, and amphibians, when it occurs at all, is at least as likely to be by males as by females (FIGURE 51.25). Male parental care occurs in only 2 out of 28 (7% ) fish and amphibian families with internal fertilization, but in 61 out of 89 (69% ) families with external fertilization. In fish, even when parental care is given exclusively by males, the mating system is often polygynous, with several females laying eggs in a nest tended by one male.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 51-25. Paternal care by a sea spider. In many species of marine arthropods called pycnogonids, or sea spiders, a male uses one pair of appendages to carry a ball of eggs that he has fertilized after their release from a mate. The male may mate with a few females, adding the bundle of eggs to those already under his care. The pycnogonid species in this photograph is unusual in that males continue to carry and protect their offspring for some time after hatching.

It is important to point out that when behavioral ecologists use such terms as certainty of paternity, they do not mean that animals are aware of those factors when they behave a certain way. Parental behavior correlated with certainty of paternity exists because it has been reinforced over generations by natural selection.




