
 Oxygen began accumulating in the atmosphere about 2.7 billion years ago

Photosynthesis probably evolved very early in prokaryotic history, but in metabolic versions that did not split water and liberate oxygen (see Chapter 10). We'll see examples of such nonoxygenic photosynthesis among modern prokaryotes in Chapter 27. The only photosynthetic prokaryotes that generate O2 are called cyanobacteria. Plentiful and diverse today, they probably evolved over 2.7 billion years ago.

Most atmospheric oxygen is of biological origin, from the water-splitting step of photosynthesis. When this oxygenic photosynthesis first evolved, the free O2 from the cyanobacteria probably dissolved in the surrounding water until the seas and lakes became saturated with the oxygen. Additional O2 would then react with dissolved iron and precipitate as iron oxide. These marine sediments were the source of banded iron formations, red layers of rock rich in the iron oxide that is a valuable source of iron ore today (FIGURE 26.5). Once all the dissolved iron had precipitated, additional O2 finally began to "gas out" of the seas and lakes to accumulate in the atmosphere. This change left its mark in the rusting of terrestrial rocks rich in iron that began oxidizing about 2.7 billion years ago. This chronology implies that cyanobacteria may have originated as early as 3.5 billion years ago, when the microbial mats that left stromatolites began forming.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 26-5. Banded iron formations are evidence of the vintage of oxygenic photosynthesis. These bands of iron oxide at Jasper Knob in Michigan are about 2 billion years old.

The accumulation of atmospheric O2 was gradual from about 2.7 to 2.2 billion years ago, but then shot up relatively rapidly to more than 10%  of its present level. This oxygen revolution had an enormous impact on life. The "corrosive" O2, which attacks chemical bonds, doomed many prokaryotic groups. Some species survived in habitats that remained anaerobic, where we find their descendants still living today as obligate anaerobes (see p. 533). Among other survivors, a diversity of adaptations to the changing atmosphere evolved, including cellular respiration, which uses oxygen to help harvest energy stored in organic molecules.

The early rise in atmospheric O2 was associated with the photosynthesis of early cyanobacteria. But what caused the accelerated rise in O2 a few hundred million years later? One hypothesis is that it followed the evolution of eukaryotic algae containing chloroplasts.




