
 The mammalian kidney's ability to conserve water is a key terrestrial adaptation

The osmolarity of human blood is about 300 mosm/L, but the kidney can excrete urine up to four times as concentrated--about 1,200 mosm/L. Some mammals can do even better. For example, Australian hopping mice, which live in dry desert regions, can produce urine concentrated to 9,300 mosm/L--9 times as concentrated as seawater and 25 times as concentrated as their body fluid.

In a mammalian kidney, the cooperative action and precise arrangement of the loops of Henle and the collecting ducts are largely responsible for the osmotic gradient that concentrates the urine. But even with this highly organized structure, the maintenance of osmotic differences and the production of hyperosmotic urine are only possible because considerable energy is expended for the active transport of solutes against concentration gradients. In essence, the nephrons--especially the loops of Henle--can be thought of as tiny energy-consuming machines whose function is to produce a region of high osmolarity in the kidney, which can then be used to extract water from the urine in the collecting duct. The two primary solutes in this osmolarity gradient are NaCl, which is deposited in the renal medulla by the loop of Henle, and urea, which leaks across the epithelium of the collecting duct in the inner medulla (see FIGURE 44.22).

Conservation of Water by Two Solute Gradients

To better understand the physiology of the mammalian kidney as a water-conserving organ, let's retrace the flow of filtrate through the excretory tubule, this time focusing on how the juxtamedullary nephrons maintain an osmolarity gradient in the kidney and use that gradient to excrete a hyperosmotic urine (FIGURE 44.23, p. 948). Filtrate passing from Bowman's capsule to the proximal tubule has an osmolarity of about 300 mosm/L, the same as blood. As the filtrate flows through the proximal tubule in the renal cortex, a large amount of water and salt is reabsorbed; thus, the volume of filtrate decreases substantially but its osmolarity remains about the same.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 44-23. How the human kidney concentrates urine: the two-solute model. From the cortex to the inner medulla, the interstitial fluid increases in osmolarity from about 300 to 1,200 mosm/L. Two solutes contribute to this gradient: NaCl and urea. The loop of Henle maintains the interstitial gradient of NaCl. The filtrate concentration of this salt increases because of the loss of water from the descending limb, then the ascending limb leaks the salt into the interstitial fluid. Additional salt is actively transported out of the thick segment of the ascending limb. The countercurrent-like arrangement of descending and ascending limbs (and the associated capillaries; FIGURE 44.21) helps maintain the high salt concentration in the medulla. The second solute, urea, is added to the interstitial fluid of the medulla by diffusion out of the collecting duct (most of the urea in the filtrate remains in the collecting duct and is excreted). The filtrate makes a total of three trips between the cortex and medulla: first down, then up, and then down one more time in the collecting duct. As the filtrate flows in the collecting duct past interstitial fluid of increasing osmolarity, more and more water moves out of the duct by osmosis, thereby concentrating the solutes, including urea, that are left behind in the filtrate. Under conditions in which the kidney conserves as much water as possible, urine can reach an osmolarity of about 1,200 mosm/L, considerably hyperosmotic to blood (about 300 mosm/L). This ability to excrete nitrogenous wastes with a minimal loss of water is a key terrestrial adaptation of mammals.

As the filtrate flows from cortex to medulla in the descending limb of the loop of Henle, water leaves the tubule by osmosis. The osmolarity of the filtrate increases as solutes, including NaCl, become more concentrated. The highest osmolarity occurs at the elbow of the loop of Henle. This maximizes the diffusion of salt out of the tubule as the filtrate rounds the curve and enters the ascending limb, which, remember, is permeable to salt but not to water. Thus, the two limbs of the loop of Henle cooperate in maintaining the gradient of osmolarity in the interstitial fluid of the kidney. The descending limb produces a progressively saltier filtrate, and the ascending limb exploits this concentration of NaCl to help maintain a high osmolarity in the interstitial fluid of the renal medulla.

Notice that the loop of Henle has several qualities of a countercurrent system, similar in principle to the countercurrent mechanisms that maximize oxygen absorption by fish gills (see FIGURES 42.19 and 42.20) or reduce heat loss from endotherm legs (see FIGURE 44.5). Although the two limbs of the loop are not in direct contact, they are close enough together to exchange substances through the interstitial fluid. The nephron can concentrate salt in the inner medulla largely because exchange between opposing flows in the descending and ascending limbs overcomes the tendency for diffusion to even out salt concentration throughout the kidney's interstitial fluid, thus confining the high salt concentration in the interior of the kidney.

What prevents the capillaries of the vasa recta from dissipating the gradient by carrying away the high concentration of NaCl in the medulla's interstitial fluid? Notice in FIGURE 44.21 that the vasa recta is also a countercurrent system, with descending and ascending vessels carrying blood in opposite directions through the kidney's osmolarity gradient. As the descending vessel conveys blood toward the inner medulla, water is lost from the blood and NaCl diffuses into it. These fluxes are reversed as blood flows back toward the cortex in the ascending vessel, with water reentering the blood and salt diffusing out. Thus, the vasa recta can supply the kidney with nutrients and other important substances carried by blood without interfering with the osmolarity gradient that makes it possible for the kidney to excrete a hyperosmotic urine.

The countercurrent-like characteristics of the loop of Henle and the vasa recta make it easier to maintain the steep osmotic gradient between the medulla and cortex. However, any osmotic gradient in an animal will eventually be eliminated by diffusion unless energy is expended to preserve it. In the kidney this expenditure largely occurs in the thick segment of the ascending limb of the loop of Henle, where NaCl is actively transported out of the tubule. Even with the benefits of countercurrent exchange, this process--along with other renal active transport systems--consumes considerable ATP, and for its size the kidney has one of the highest metabolic rates of any organ.

By the time the filtrate reaches the distal tubule, it is actually hypoosmotic to body fluids because of active transport of NaCl out of the thick segment of the ascending limb. Now the filtrate descends again toward the medulla, this time in the collecting duct, which is permeable to water but not to salt. Therefore, osmosis extracts water from the filtrate as it passes from cortex to medulla and encounters interstitial fluid of increasing osmolarity. This concentrates salt, urea, and other solutes in the filtrate. Some urea leaks out of the lower portion of the collecting duct and contributes to the high interstitial osmolarity of the inner medulla. (This urea is recycled by diffusion into the loop of Henle, but continual leakage from the collecting duct maintains a high interstitial urea concentration.) Before leaving the kidney, the urine may attain the osmolarity of the interstitial fluid in the inner medulla, which can be as high as 1,200 mosm/L. Although isoosmotic to the inner medulla's interstitial fluid, the urine is hyperosmotic to blood and interstitial fluid elsewhere in the body. This high osmolarity allows the solutes remaining in the urine to be excreted from the body with minimal water loss.

The juxtamedullary nephron, with its urine-concentrating features, is a key adaptation to terrestrial life, enabling mammals to get rid of salts and nitrogenous wastes without squandering water. As we have seen, the remarkable ability of the mammalian kidney to produce hyperosmotic urine is completely dependent on the precise arrangement of the tubules and collecting ducts in the renal cortex and medulla. In this respect, the kidney is one of the clearest examples of how the function of an organ is inseparably linked to its structure.

How the Nervous System and Hormones Regulate Kidney Functions

One of the most important aspects of the mammalian kidney is its ability to adjust both the volume and osmolarity of urine, depending on the animal's water and salt balance and the rate of urea production. In situations of high salt intake and low water availability, a mammal can excrete urea and salt with minimal water loss in small volumes of hyperosmotic urine. But if salt is scarce and fluid intake is high, the kidney can get rid of the excess water with little salt loss by producing large volumes of hypoosmotic urine (as dilute as 70 mosm/L, compared to about 300 mosm/L for human blood). This versatility in osmoregulatory function is managed with a combination of nervous and hormonal controls.

One hormone important in regulating water balance is antidiuretic hormone (ADH) (FIGURE 44.24a, p. 950). It is produced in a part of the brain called the hypothalamus and is stored in and released from the pituitary gland, which is positioned just below the hypothalamus. Osmoreceptor cells in the hypothalamus monitor the osmolarity of blood; when it rises above a set point of 300 mosm/L (perhaps due to water loss from sweating in a hot environment), more ADH is released into the bloodstream and reaches the kidney. The main targets of ADH are the distal tubules and collecting ducts of the kidney, where the hormone increases the permeability of the epithelium to water. This amplifies water reabsorption, which reduces urine volume and helps prevent further increase of blood osmolarity above the set point. By negative feedback, the subsiding osmolarity of the blood reduces the activity of osmoreceptor cells in the hypothalamus, and less ADH is then secreted. But only the gain of additional water in food and drink can bring osmolarity all the way back down to 300 mosm/L. Conversely, if a large intake of water has reduced blood osmolarity below the set point, very little ADH is released. This decreases the permeability of the distal tubules and collecting ducts, so water reabsorption is reduced, resulting in an increased discharge of dilute urine. (Increased urination is called diuresis, and it is because ADH opposes this state that it is called antidiuretic hormone.) Alcohol can disturb water balance by inhibiting the release of ADH, causing excessive urinary water loss and dehydration (which may cause some of the symptoms of a hangover). Normally, blood osmolarity, ADH release, and water reabsorption in the kidney are all linked in a feedback loop that contributes to homeostasis.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 44-24. Hormonal control of the kidney by negative feedback circuits. (a) Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) enhances fluid retention by making the kidneys reclaim more water. The release of ADH is triggered when osmoreceptor cells in the hypothalamus detect an increase in the osmolarity of the blood. In this situation, the osmoreceptor cells also promote thirst. Drinking reduces the osmolarity of the blood, which inhibits the secretion of ADH, completing the feedback circuit. (b) The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) centers on the juxtaglomerular apparatus (JGA). The JGA responds to a decrease in blood pressure or blood volume by releasing the enzyme renin into the bloodstream (small black arrows). In the blood, renin initiates the conversion of angiotensinogen to angiotensin II. Angiotensin II increases blood pressure by causing arterioles to constrict. It also increases blood volume in two ways: by signaling the proximal tubules of the nephrons to reabsorb more NaCl and water (not illustrated) and by stimulating the adrenal glands to release aldosterone, a hormone that makes the distal tubules reabsorb more Na+ and water. This leads to an increase in blood volume and pressure, completing the feedback circuit by suppressing the release of renin.

A second regulatory mechanism involves a specialized tissue called the juxtaglomerular apparatus (JGA), located near the afferent arteriole that supplies blood to the glomerulus (FIGURE 44.24b). When blood pressure or blood volume in the afferent arteriole drops (sometimes as a result of reduced salt intake), the enzyme renin initiates chemical reactions that convert a plasma protein called angiotensinogen to a peptide called angiotensin II. Functioning as a hormone, angiotensin II increases blood pressure and blood volume in several ways. It raises blood pressure by constricting arterioles, decreasing blood flow to many capillaries, including those of the kidney. Angiotensin II also stimulates the proximal tubules of the nephrons to reabsorb more NaCl and water. This reduces the amount of salt and water excreted in the urine and consequently raises blood volume and pressure. Another effect of angiotensin II is stimulation of the adrenal glands, organs located atop the kidneys, to release a hormone called aldosterone. This hormone acts on the nephrons' distal tubules, making them reabsorb more sodium (Na+) and water and increasing blood volume and pressure. In summary, the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) is part of a complex feedback circuit that functions in homeostasis. A drop in blood pressure and blood volume triggers renin release from the JGA. In turn, the rise in blood pressure and volume resulting from the various actions of angiotensin II and aldosterone reduce the release of renin (see FIGURE 44.24b).

The functions of ADH and the RAAS may seem to be redundant, but this is not the case. Both increase water reabsorption, but they counter different osmoregulatory problems. The release of ADH is a response to an increase in the osmolarity of the blood, as when the body is dehydrated from excessive loss or inadequate intake of water. However, a situation that causes an excessive loss of salt and body fluids--an injury, for example, or severe diarrhea--will reduce blood volume without increasing osmolarity. This will not induce a change in ADH release, but the RAAS will detect the fall in blood volume and pressure and respond by increasing water and Na+ reabsorption. Normally, ADH and the RAAS are partners in homeostasis; ADH alone would lower blood Na+ concentration by stimulating water reabsorption in the kidney, but the RAAS helps maintain balance by stimulating Na+ reabsorption.

Still another hormone, a peptide called atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), opposes the RAAS. The walls of the atria of the heart release ANF in response to an increase in blood volume and pressure. ANF inhibits the release of renin from the JGA, inhibits NaCl reabsorption by the collecting ducts, and reduces aldosterone release from the adrenal glands. These actions lower blood volume and pressure. Thus, ADH, the RAAS, and ANF provide an elaborate system of checks and balances that regulate the kidney's ability to control the osmolarity, salt concentration, volume, and pressure of blood.

The flexibility of the mammalian kidney enables it to adjust rapidly to contrasting osmoregulatory and excretory problems. The South American vampire bat (FIGURE 44.25, p. 951) illustrates this versatility. Bats of this species feed on the blood of large birds and mammals. With a feeding mechanism that is surprisingly stealthy, the bats use sharp teeth to make a small incision in the victim's skin and then lap up blood from the wound. Anticoagulents in the bat's saliva prevent the blood from clotting, but the prey animal is usually not seriously harmed. Because vampire bats often search for many hours and fly for long distances to locate a suitable victim, they benefit from consuming as much blood as possible when they do find prey--so much that after feeding, a bat could be too heavy to fly. This problem is solved by the bat using its kidneys to offload much of the water absorbed from a blood meal by excreting large volumes of dilute urine as it feeds, at rates of up to 24%  of body mass per hour. Having lost enough weight to take off, the bat can fly back to its roost in a cave or hollow tree, where it spends the day. In the roost, the bat faces a very different regulatory problem. Its food is mostly protein, which generates large quantities of urea--but roosting bats don't have access to drinking water. Their kidneys shift to producing small quantities of highly concentrated urine (up to 4,600 mosm/L), an adjustment that disposes of the urea load while conserving as much water as possible. The vampire bat's ability to alternate rapidly between producing large amounts of dilute urine and small amounts of very hyperosmotic urine is an essential part of its adaption to an unusual food source.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 44-25. A vampire bat (Desmodus rotundas), a mammal with a unique excretory situation. While the bat feeds on a blood meal, its kidneys excrete dilute urine copiously, thus shedding weight for the flight home. While the bat roosts during the day, the kidneys conserve water by excreting small quantities of urine that is very concentrated in the urea that is produced during the metabolism of proteins from the blood meal.

Having considered the mammalian kidney and its regulation in detail, we can now compare the structures and functions of kidneys in other vertebrate classes.




