
 Membranes are fluid

Membranes are not static sheets of molecules locked rigidly in place. A membrane is held together primarily by hydrophobic interactions, which are much weaker than covalent bonds (see Chapter 5). Most of the lipids and some of the proteins can drift about laterally--that is, in the plane of the membrane (FIGURE 8.4a). It is rare, however, for a molecule to flip-flop transversely across the membrane, switching from one phospholipid layer to the other; to do so, the hydrophilic part of the molecule would have to cross the hydrophobic core of the membrane.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 8-4. The fluidity of membranes.

The lateral movement of phospholipids within the membrane is rapid, averaging about 2 mm--the length of a typical bacterial cell--per second. Proteins are much larger than lipids and move more slowly, but some membrane proteins do, in fact, drift (FIGURE 8.5). And some membrane proteins seem to move in a highly directed manner, perhaps driven along cytoskeletal fibers by motor proteins connected to the membrane proteins' cytoplasmic regions. However, many other membrane proteins seem to be held virtually immobile by their attachment to the cytoskeleton.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 8-5. Evidence for the drifting of membrane proteins. When researchers fuse a human cell with a mouse cell, it takes less than an hour for the membrane proteins of the two species to completely intermingle in the membrane of the hybrid cell.

A membrane remains fluid as temperature decreases, until finally the phospholipids settle into a closely packed arrangement and the membrane solidifies, much as bacon grease forms lard when it cools. The temperature at which a membrane solidifies depends on the types of lipids it is made of. The membrane remains fluid to a lower temperature if it is rich in phospholipids with unsaturated hydrocarbon tails (see FIGURES 5.11 and 5.12). Because of kinks in the tails where double bonds are located, unsaturated hydrocarbons do not pack together as closely as saturated hydrocarbons (see FIGURE 8.4b).

The steroid cholesterol, which is wedged between phospholipid molecules in the plasma membranes of animal cells, has different effects on membrane fluidity at different temperatures (see FIGURE 8.4c). At relatively warm temperatures--at 37&#176;C, the body temperature of humans, for example--cholesterol makes the membrane less fluid by restraining the movement of phospholipids. However, because cholesterol also hinders the close packing of phospholipids, it lowers the temperature required for the membrane to solidify.

Membranes must be fluid to work properly; they are usually about as fluid as salad oil. When a membrane solidifies, its permeability changes, and enzymatic proteins in the membrane may become inactive. Cells can alter the lipid composition of their membranes as an adjustment to changing temperature. For instance, in many plants that tolerate extreme cold, such as winter wheat, the percentage of unsaturated phospholipids increases in autumn, an adaptation that keeps the membranes from solidifying during winter.




