
 Nucleic acids store and transmit hereditary information

There are two types of nucleic acids: deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA). These are the molecules that enable living organisms to reproduce their complex components from one generation to the next. Unique among molecules, DNA provides directions for its own replication. DNA also directs RNA synthesis and, through RNA, controls protein synthesis.

DNA is the genetic material that organisms inherit from their parents. A DNA molecule is very long and usually consists of hundreds or thousands of genes. When a cell reproduces itself by dividing, its DNA molecules (one per chromosome) are copied and passed along from one generation of cells to the next. Encoded in the structure of DNA is the information that programs all the cell's activities. The DNA, however, is not directly involved in running the operations of the cell, any more than computer software by itself can print a bank statement or read the bar code on a box of cereal. Just as a printer is needed to print out a statement and a scanner is needed to read a bar code, proteins are required to implement genetic programs. The molecular hardware of the cell--the tools for most biological functions--consists of proteins. For example, it is the protein hemoglobin that carries oxygen in the blood, not the DNA that specifies the structure of hemoglobin.

How does RNA, the other type of nucleic acid, fit into the flow of genetic information from DNA to proteins? Each gene along the length of a DNA molecule directs the synthesis of a type of RNA called messenger RNA (mRNA). The mRNA molecule then interacts with the cell's protein-synthesizing machinery to direct the production of a polypeptide. We can summarize the flow of genetic information as DN  RNA  protein (FIGURE 5.28, p. 82). The actual sites of protein synthesis are cellular structures called ribosomes. In a eukaryotic cell, ribosomes are located in the cytoplasm, but DNA resides in the nucleus. Messenger RNA conveys the genetic instructions for building proteins from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. Prokaryotic cells lack nuclei, but they still use RNA to send a message from the DNA to the ribosomes and other equipment of the cell that translate the coded information into amino acid sequences.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 5-28. DN  RNA  protein: a diagrammatic overview of information flow in a cell. In a eukaryotic cell, DNA in the nucleus programs protein production in the cytoplasm by dictating the synthesis of messenger RNA (mRNA), which travels to the cytoplasm and binds to ribosomes. As a ribosome (greatly enlarged in this drawing) moves along the mRNA, the genetic message is translated into a polypeptide of specific amino acid sequence.




