
 Watson and Crick discovered the double helix by building models to conform to X-ray data

Once most biologists were convinced that DNA was the genetic material, the challenge was to determine how the structure of DNA could account for its role in inheritance. By the beginning of the 1950s, the arrangement of covalent bonds in a nucleic acid polymer was well established (FIGURE 16.3), and researchers focused on discovering the three-dimensional structure of DNA. Among the scientists working on the problem were Linus Pauling, in California, and Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin, in London. First to come up with the correct answer, however, were two scientists who were relatively unknown at the time--the American James Watson and the Englishman Francis Crick.

The brief but celebrated partnership that solved the DNA puzzle began soon after the young Watson journeyed to Cambridge University, where Crick was studying protein structure with a technique called X-ray crystallography (see FIGURE 5.27). While visiting the laboratory of Maurice Wilkins at King's College in London, Watson saw an X-ray diffraction image of DNA produced by Wilkins's colleague, Rosalind Franklin (FIGURE 16.4a). Images produced by X-ray crystallography are not actually pictures of molecules. The spots and smudges in FIGURE 16.4b were produced by X-rays that were diffracted (deflected) as they passed through aligned fibers of purified DNA. Crystallographers use mathematical equations to translate such patterns of spots into information about the three-dimensional shapes of molecules, and Watson was familiar with the types of patterns that helical molecules produce. Just a glance at Franklin's X-ray diffraction photo of DNA not only told him that DNA was helical in shape but also enabled him to deduce the width of the helix and the spacing of the nitrogenous bases along it. The width of the helix suggested that it was made up of two strands, contrary to a three-stranded model that Linus Pauling had recently proposed. The presence of two strands accounts for the now-familiar term double helix.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 16-4. Rosalind Franklin and her X-ray diffraction photo of DNA. Franklin, an X-ray crystallographer, took the photo that Watson and Crick used in deducing the double-helical structure of DNA. Franklin died of cancer when she was only 38. Her colleague, Maurice Wilkins, received the Nobel Prize in 1962 along with Watson and Crick. Because the Nobel Prize is not awarded posthumously, science historians can only speculate about whether the committee would have recognized Franklin's contribution to the discovery of the double helix. (a) Rosalind Franklin (b) Franklin's X-ray diffraction photograph of DNA

Using molecular models made of wire, Watson and Crick began building models of a double helix that would conform to the X-ray measurements and what was then known about the chemistry of DNA. After failing to make a satisfactory model that placed the sugar-phosphate chains on the inside of the molecule, Watson tried putting them on the outside and forcing the nitrogenous bases to swivel to the interior of the double helix (FIGURE 16.5). Imagine this double helix as a rope ladder having rigid rungs, with the ladder twisted into a spiral. The side ropes are the equivalent of the sugar-phosphate backbones, and the rungs represent pairs of nitrogenous bases. Franklin's X-ray data indicated that the helix makes one full turn every 3.4 nm along its length. With the bases stacked just 0.34 nm apart, there are ten layers of base pairs, or rungs on the ladder, in each turn of the helix. This arrangement was appealing because it put the relatively hydrophobic nitrogenous bases in the molecule's interior and thus away from the surrounding aqueous medium.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 16-5. The double helix. (a) The "ribbons" in this diagram represent the sugar-phosphate backbones of the two DNA strands. The helix is "right-handed," curving up to the right. The two strands are held together by hydrogen bonds (dotted lines) between the nitrogenous bases, which are paired in the interior of the double helix. (b) For clarity, the two DNA strands are shown untwisted in this partial chemical structure. Notice that the strands are oriented in opposite directions. (c) The tight stacking of the base pairs is clear in this computer model. Van der Waals attractions between the stacked pairs play a major role in holding the molecule together.

The nitrogenous bases of the double helix are paired in specific combinations: adenine (A) with thymine (T), and guanine (G) with cytosine (C). It was mainly by trial and error that Watson and Crick arrived at this key feature of DNA. At first, Watson imagined that the bases paired like-with-like--for example, A with A and C with C. But this model did not fit the X-ray data, which suggested that the double helix had a uniform diameter. Why is this requirement inconsistent with like-with-like pairing of bases? Adenine and guanine are purines, nitrogenous bases with two organic rings. In contrast, cytosine and thymine belong to the family of nitrogenous bases known as pyrimidines, which have a single ring. Thus, purines (A and G) are about twice as wide as pyrimidines (C and T). A purine-purine pair is too wide and a pyrimidine-pyrimidine pair too narrow to account for the 2-nm diameter of the double helix. The solution is to always pair a purine with a pyrimidine:

Watson and Crick reasoned that there must be additional specificity of pairing dictated by the structure of the bases. Each base has chemical side groups that can form hydrogen bonds with its appropriate partner: Adenine can form two hydrogen bonds with thymine and only thymine; guanine forms three hydrogen bonds with cytosine and only cytosine. In shorthand, A pairs with T, and G pairs with C (FIGURE 16.6).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 16-6. Base pairing in DNA. The pairs of nitrogenous bases in a DNA double helix are held together by hydrogen bonds as shown here.

The Watson-Crick model explained Chargaff's rules. Wherever one strand of a DNA molecule has an A, the partner strand has a T. And a G in one strand is always paired with a C in the complementary strand. Therefore, in the DNA of any organism, the amount of adenine equals the amount of thymine, and the amount of guanine equals the amount of cytosine. Although the base-pairing rules dictate the combinations of nitrogenous bases that form the "rungs" of the double helix, they do not restrict the sequence of nucleotides along each DNA strand. The linear sequence of the four bases can be varied in countless ways, and each gene has a unique order, or base sequence.

In April 1953, Watson and Crick surprised the scientific world with a succinct, one-page paper in the British journal Nature.* The paper reported their molecular model for DNA: the double helix, which has since become the symbol of molecular biology. The beauty of the model was that its structure suggested the basic mechanism of DNA replication.




