
 Stramenopila: The stramenopile clade includes the water molds and the heterokont algae

A diverse protistan clade, Stramenopila includes several heterotrophic groups as well as a variety of photosynthetic protists (algae). The term stramenopila refers to the numerous fine, hairlike projections on the flagella that are characteristic of these organisms (from the Latin stramen, straw, flagellum, and pilos, hair). In most cases, the "hairy" flagellum is paired with a smooth (nonhairy) flagellum. In the life cycles of most stramenopile groups, the only flagellated stages are motile reproductive cells.

Oomycota (Water Molds and Their Relatives)

Oomycotes include the water molds, white rusts, and downy mildews, all examples of heterotrophic stramenopiles that lack chloroplasts. Some of these organisms are unicellular; others consist of hyphae (fine, branching filaments) that are multi-nucleated (coencytic). Hyphae in this group are analogous to the branching filaments (also called hyphae) of true fungi. However, water molds and their relatives typically have cell walls made of cellulose, while the walls of true fungi are made of another polysaccharide, chitin. The diploid condition, which is reduced in true fungi, prevails in the life cycles of most members of Oomycota. Biflagellated cells occur in the life cycles of oomycotes, while almost all true fungi lack flagella. Molecular systematics has confirmed that water molds and other oomycotes are not closely related to fungi. The similar "body plan"--a mass of thin filaments (hyphae)--is an example of convergent evolution. In both the oomycotes and fungi, the filamentous bodies have an extensive surface area, which enhances the absorption of nutrients.

Oomycota means "egg fungi," a reference to the mode of sexual reproduction in water molds. A relatively large egg cell is fertilized by a smaller "sperm nucleus," forming a resistant zygote (FIGURE 28.16).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 28-16. The life cycle of a water mold. Water molds help decompose dead insects, fish, and other animals submerged in fresh water (see the hyphal mass on the goldfish in the inset).

Most water molds are decomposers that grow as cottony masses on dead algae and animals, mainly in fresh water. There are also parasitic water molds, such as those that grow on the skin and gills of fish in ponds or aquariums, but they usually attack only injured tissue.

White rusts and downy mildews generally live on land as parasites of plants. They are dispersed primarily by windblown spores, but they also form flagellated zoospores at some point during their life cycles. One devastating plant pathogen, a downy mildew, threatened the French vineyards in the 1870s. Another oomycote species, Phytophthora infestans, causes late potato blight, which contributed to the Irish famine in the 19th century.

Overview of the Heterokont Algae

The stramenopile taxa with mostly photosynthetic members are collectively called the heterokont algae, with the "hetero" referring to the two different types of flagella ("hairy" and "nonhairy"), which are characteristic of the whole stramenopile group.

The plastids of heterokont algae evolved by secondary endosymbiosis. This explains the three-membrane envelope and the presence of a small amount of eukaryotic cytoplasm within the plastid (see FIGURE 28.5). The probable ancestor of the plastids in heterokont algae was a red alga, its own plastid derived from a cyanobacterium by primary endosymbiosis. The heterokont algae include the diatoms, golden algae, and brown algae.

Bacillariophyta (Diatoms)

Yellow or brown in color, diatoms have unique glasslike walls consisting of hydrated silica embedded in an organic matrix. Each wall is in two parts that overlap like a shoe box and lid (FIGURE 28.17).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 28-17. Diatoms. The glasslike shells consist of two halves that fit like the bottom and lid of a shoe box. Tiny pores in the ornate shells allow for the exchange of gases and other substances between the cell and its environment. During mitosis, each daughter cell keeps half of the parent cell's shell and builds a new complementary half.

Most of the year, diatoms reproduce asexually by mitotic cell divisions, with each daughter cell receiving half of the cell wall of its parent and regenerating a new second half. Cysts are formed by some species as resistant stages. Sexual stages are not common and involve the formation of eggs and sperm; sperm cells are amoeboid or flagellated, depending on the species.

Both freshwater and marine plankton are rich in diatoms; a bucket of water scooped from the surface of the sea may have millions of these microscopic algae. In common with golden algae and brown algae, diatoms store food reserves in the form of a glucose polymer called laminarin. Some diatoms also store food in the form of oil.

Massive accumulations of fossilized diatom walls are major constituents of the sediments known as diatomaceous earth, which is mined for its quality as a filtering medium and for many other uses.

Chrysophyta (Golden Algae)

Golden algae, or chrysophytes (from the Greek chrysos, golden), are named for their color, which results from yellow and brown carotene and xanthophyll accessory pigments. Their cells are typically biflagellated, with both flagella attached near one end of the cell. Many golden algae live among freshwater and marine plankton. Some species are mixotrophic, absorbing dissolved organic compounds or ingesting food particles and bacteria by phagocytosis, which occurs near the base of the flagella. Most golden algae are unicellular, but some, such as the freshwater genus Dinobryon, are colonial (FIGURE 28.18). If cell density reaches a certain high level, many species form resistant cysts that can remain viable for decades.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 28-18. A golden alga. Dinobryon is a freshwater member of this algal group. This species is colonial, but most golden algae are unicellular (LM).

Phaeophyta (Brown Algae)

The largest and most complex algae are brown algae, or phaeophytes (from the Greek phaios, dusky, brown). All are multicellular, and most are marine. Brown algae are especially common along temperate coasts, where the water is cool. They owe their characteristic brown or olive color to accessory pigments in the plastids. The plastid structure and pigment composition of brown algae are homologous to the photosynthetic equipment of golden algae and diatoms.

Many of the eukaryotes commonly called seaweeds are brown algae. Seaweeds are large marine algae, and the largest members of this important ecological group are brown algae. Two other groups, the red algae and green algae, also include seaweeds. We will examine these algal groups after we look at some of the adaptations, human uses, and life cycles of the seaweeds.




