
 Plant cells are encased by cell walls

The cell wall is one of the features of plant cells that distinguishes them from animal cells. The wall protects the plant cell, maintains its shape, and prevents excessive uptake of water. On the level of the whole plant, the strong walls of specialized cells hold the plant up against the force of gravity. Prokaryotes, fungi, and some protists also have cell walls, but we will postpone discussion of them until Unit Five.

Plant cell walls are much thicker than the plasma membrane, ranging from 0.1 mm to several micrometers. The exact chemical composition of the wall varies from species to species and from one cell type to another in the same plant, but the basic design of the wall is consistent. Microfibrils made of the polysaccharide cellulose (see FIGURE 5.8) are embedded in a matrix of other polysaccharides and protein. This combination of materials, strong fibers in a "ground substance" (matrix), is the same basic architectural design found in steel-reinforced concrete and in fiberglass.

A young plant cell first secretes a relatively thin and flexible wall called the primary cell wall (FIGURE 7.28). Between primary walls of adjacent cells is the middle lamella, a thin layer rich in sticky polysaccharides called pectins. The middle lamella glues the cells together (pectin is used as a thickening agent in jams and jellies). When the cell matures and stops growing, it strengthens its wall. Some plant cells do this simply by secreting hardening substances into the primary wall. Other cells add a secondary cell wall between the plasma membrane and the primary wall. The secondary wall, often deposited in several laminated layers, has a strong and durable matrix that affords the cell protection and support. Wood, for example, consists mainly of secondary walls.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 7-28. Plant cell walls. Plant cells first construct thin primary walls, often adding stronger secondary walls to the inside of the primary wall when the cell's growth ceases. A sticky middle lamella cements adjacent cells together. Thus, the multilayered partition between these cells consists of adjoining walls individually secreted by the cells. The walls do not isolate the cells: The cytoplasm of one cell is continuous with the cytoplasm of its neighbors via plasmodesmata, channels through the walls (TEM).




