
 In the cell-mediated response, cytotoxic T cells counter intracellular pathogens:

a closer look

Antigen-activated cytotoxic T lymphocytes kill cancer cells and cells infected by viruses or other intracellular pathogens. Before we look at these events, we must return to class I MHC proteins and their role in presenting antigen to cytotoxic T cells. Recall that all nucleated cells of the body continuously produce class I MHC molecules. As a newly synthesized class I molecule moves toward the cell surface, it captures a small fragment of one of the other proteins synthesized by that cell. If that cell happens to contain a replicating virus, peptide fragments of viral proteins are captured and transported to the cell surface. In this way, class I MHC molecules expose foreign proteins that are synthesized in infected or abnormal cells to cytotoxic T cells. The interaction between the antigen-presenting infected cell and a cytotoxic T cell is greatly enhanced by the presence of a T cell surface protein called CD8. Present on most cytotoxic T cells, CD8 binds to a portion of the class I MHC molecule. The CD8-class I MHC interaction helps keep the two cells in contact while activation of the TC cell is occurring (FIGURE 43.12). Thus, the roles of class I MHC molecules and CD8 are similar to those of class II MHC molecules and CD4, except that different cells are involved.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 43-12. The functioning of cytotoxic T cells. (a) A cytotoxic T cell (TC cell) responds to an infected cell (or cancer cell) that displays an antigen fragment recognized by its T-cell receptor. A class I MHC molecule presents the antigen fragment. (b) In this SEM, the TC cell has lysed the cancer cell.

A cytotoxic T cell, when activated by specific contacts with class I MHC-antigen complexes on an infected cell and further stimulated by IL-2 from a helper T cell, differentiates into an active killer. It kills its target cell--the antigen-presenting cell--primarily by releasing perforin, a protein that forms pores in the target cell's membrane. As ions and water flow into the target cell, it swells and eventually lyses (see FIGURE 43.12a). The death of the infected cell not only deprives the pathogen of a place to reproduce but also exposes it to circulating antibodies, which mark it for disposal. After destroying an infected cell, the TC cell moves on to kill other cells infected with the same pathogen.

In the same way, TC cells defend against malignant tumors. Because tumor cells carry distinctive molecules not found on normal cells, they are identified as foreign by the immune system. Class I MHC molecules on a tumor cell present fragments of tumor antigen to TC cells. Interestingly, certain cancers and viruses (such as Epstein-Barr virus) actively reduce the amount of class I MHC protein on affected cells so that they escape detection by TC cells. The body has a backup defense: Natural killer (NK) cells, part of the body's nonspecific defenses, also lyse virus-infected and cancer cells.




