
 Vacuoles have diverse functions in cell maintenance

Vacuoles and vesicles are both membrane-bounded sacs within the cell, but vacuoles are larger than vesicles. Vacuoles have various functions. Food vacuoles, formed by phagocytosis, have already been mentioned (see FIGURE 7.14). Many freshwater protists have contractile vacuoles that pump excess water out of the cell (see FIGURE 8.13). Mature plant cells generally contain a large central vacuole (FIGURE 7.15) enclosed by a membrane called the tonoplast, which is part of their endomembrane system. The central vacuole develops by the coalescence of smaller vacuoles, themselves derived from the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus. The vacuole is in this way an integral part of the endomembrane system. Like all cellular membranes, the tonoplast is selective in transporting solutes; therefore, the solution inside the vacuole, called cell sap, differs in composition from the cytosol.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 7-15. The plant cell vacuole. The central vacuole is usually the largest compartment in a plant cell, comprising 80%  or more of a mature cell. The rest of the cytoplasm is generally confined to a narrow zone between the vacuolar membrane (tonoplast) and the plasma membrane. Functions of the vacuole include storage, waste disposal, protection, and growth (TEM).

The plant cell's central vacuole is a versatile compartment. It can hold reserves of important organic compounds, such as the proteins stockpiled in the vacuoles of storage cells in seeds. It is also the plant cell's main repository of inorganic ions, such as potassium and chloride. Many plant cells use their vacuoles as disposal sites for metabolic by-products that would endanger the cell if they accumulated in the cytosol. Some vacuoles contain pigments that color the cells, such as the red and blue pigments of petals that help attract pollinating insects to flowers. Vacuoles may also help protect the plant against predators by containing compounds that are poisonous or unpalatable to animals. The vacuole has a major role in the growth of plant cells, which elongate as their vacuoles absorb water, enabling the cell to become larger with a minimal investment in new cytoplasm. And because the cytosol often occupies only a thin layer between the plasma membrane and the tonoplast, the ratio of membrane surface to cytosolic volume is great, even for a large plant cell.

FIGURE 7.16 reviews the endomembrane system, showing the flow of membranes through the various organelles. As the membrane moves from the ER to the Golgi and then elsewhere, its molecular composition and metabolic functions are modified. The endomembrane system is a complex and dynamic player in the cell's compartmental organization.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 7-16. Review: relationships among organelles of the endomembrane system. The red arrows show some of the pathways of membrane migration. The nuclear envelope is connected to the rough ER, which is also confluent with smooth ER. Membrane produced by the ER flows in the form of transport vesicles to the Golgi, which in turn pinches off vesicles that give rise to lysosomes and vacuoles. Even the plasma membrane expands by the fusion of vesicles born in the ER and Golgi. Coalescence of vesicles with the plasma membrane also releases secretory proteins and other products to the outside of the cell.

We'll continue our tour of the cell with some membranous organelles that are not closely related to the endomembrane system.




