
 Enzymes proofread DNA during its replication and repair damage in existing DNA

We cannot attribute the accuracy of DNA replication solely to the specificity of base pairing. Although errors in the completed DNA molecule amount to only one in a billion nucleotides, initial pairing errors between incoming nucleotides and those in the template strand are 100,000 times more common--an error rate of one in 10,000 base pairs. During DNA replication, DNA polymerase itself proofreads each nucleotide against its template as soon as it is added to the growing strand. Upon finding an incorrectly paired nucleotide, the polymerase removes the nucleotide and then resumes synthesis. (This action resembles correcting a word-processing error by using the "delete" key and then entering the correction.)

Mismatched nucleotides sometimes evade proofreading by DNA polymerase or arise after DNA synthesis is completed--by damage to a nucleotide base, for instance. In mismatch repair, cells use special enzymes to fix incorrectly paired nucleotides. Researchers spotlighted the importance of such proteins when they found that a hereditary defect in one of them is associated with a form of colon cancer. Apparently, this defect allows cancer-causing errors to accumulate in the DNA.

Maintenance of the genetic information encoded in DNA requires frequent repair of various kinds of damage to existing DNA. DNA molecules are constantly subjected to potentially harmful chemical and physical agents. Reactive chemicals (in the environment and occurring naturally in cells), radioactive emissions, X-rays, and ultraviolet light can change nucleotides in ways that can affect encoded genetic information, usually adversely. In addition, DNA bases often undergo spontaneous chemical changes under normal cellular conditions. Fortunately, changes in DNA are usually corrected before they become self-perpetuating mutations. Each cell continuously monitors and repairs its genetic material. Because repair of damaged DNA is so important to the survival of an organism, it is no surprise that many different DNA repair enzymes have evolved. Almost 100 are known in E. coli, and 130 have been identified so far in humans.

Most mechanisms for repairing DNA damage take advantage of the base-paired structure of DNA. Usually, a segment of the strand containing the damage is cut out (excised) by a DNA-cutting enzyme--a nuclease--and the resulting gap is filled in with nucleotides properly paired with the nucleotides in the undamaged strand. The enzymes involved in filling the gap are a DNA polymerase and ligase. DNA repair of this type is called nucleotide excision repair (FIGURE 16.17).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 16-17. Nucleotide excision repair of DNA damage. A team of enzymes detects and repairs damaged DNA. This figure shows DNA containing a thymine dimer, a type of damage often caused by ultra-violet radiation. Repair enzymes can excise the damaged region from the DNA and replace it with a normal DNA segment.

One function of the DNA repair enzymes in our skin cells is to repair genetic damage caused by the ultraviolet rays of sunlight. One type of damage, the type shown in FIGURE 16.17, is the covalent linking of thymine bases that are adjacent on a DNA strand. Such thymine dimers cause the DNA to buckle and interfere with DNA replication. The importance of repairing this kind of damage is underscored by the disorder xeroderma pigmentosum, which in most cases is caused by an inherited defect in a nucleotide excision repair enzyme. Individuals with this disorder are hypersensitive to sunlight; mutations in their skin cells caused by ultraviolet light are left uncorrected and cause skin cancer.




