
 Life requires about 25 chemical elements

About 25 of the 92 natural elements are known to be essential to life. Just four of these--carbon (C), oxygen (O), hydrogen (H), and nitrogen (N)--make up 96%  of living matter. Phosphorus (P), sulfur (S), calcium (Ca), potassium (K), and a few other elements account for most of the remaining 4%  of an organism's weight. TABLE 2.1 (p. 28) lists by percentage the elements that make up the human body; the percentages for other organisms are similar. FIGURE 2.3 (p. 28) illustrates the effect of nitrogen deficiency in a plant.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 2-3. The effect of nitrogen deficiency in corn. In this controlled experiment, the plants on the left are growing in soil that was fertilized with compounds containing nitrogen, an essential element. The soil on the right is deficient in nitrogen. If the poorly nourished crop growing in this deficient soil is harvested, it will yield less food--and less nutritious food--than the crop on the left.

Table 2-1. Naturally Occurring Elements in the Human Body

SymbolElementAtomic Number (See p. 29)Percentage of Human Body WeightOOxygen865.0CCarbon618.5HHydrogen19.5NNitrogen73.3CaCalcium201.5PPhosphorus151.0KPotassium190.4SSulfur160.3NaSodium110.2ClChlorine170.2MgMagnesium120.1Trace elements (less than 0.01% ): boron (B), chromium (Cr), cobalt (Co), copper (Cu), fluorine (F), iodine (I), iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), molybdenum (Mo), selenium (Se), silicon (Si), tin (Sn), vanadium (V), and zinc (Zn).Trace elements are those required by an organism in only minute quantities. Some trace elements, such as iron (Fe), are needed by all forms of life; others are required only by certain species. For example, in vertebrates (animals with backbones), the element iodine (I) is an essential ingredient of a hormone produced by the thyroid gland. A daily intake of only 0.15 milligram (mg) of iodine is adequate for normal activity of the human thyroid. An iodine deficiency in the diet causes the thyroid gland to grow to abnormal size, a condition called goiter (FIGURE 2.4). Where it is available, iodized salt has reduced the incidence of goiter.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 2-4. Goiter. The enlarged thyroid gland of this Malaysian woman is due to an iodine deficiency.




