
Chapter 34: VERTEBRATE EVOLUTION AND DIVERSITY

INVERTEBRATE CHORDATES AND THE ORIGIN OF VERTEBRATES

   Four anatomical features characterize the phylum Chordata

   Invertebrate chordates provide clues to the origin of vertebrates



INTRODUCTION TO THE VERTEBRATES

   Neural crest, pronounced cephalization, a vertebral column, and a closed circulatory system characterize the subphylum Vertebrata

   An overview of vertebrate diversity



JAWLESS VERTEBRATES

   Class Myxini: Hagfishes are the most primitive living "vertebrates"

   Class Cephalaspidomorphi: Lampreys provide clues to the evolution of the vertebral column

   Some extinct jawless vertebrates had ossified teeth and bony armor



FISHES AND AMPHIBIANS

   Vertebrate jaws evolved from skeletal supports of pharyngeal slits

   Class Chondrichthyes: Sharks and rays have cartilaginous skeletons

   Osteichthyes: The extant classes of bony fishes are the ray-finned fishes, the lobe-finned fishes, and the lungfishes

   Tetrapods evolved from specialized fishes that inhabited shallow water

   Class Amphibia: Salamanders, frogs, and caecilians are the three extant amphibian orders



AMNIOTES

   Evolution of the amniotic egg expanded the success of vertebrates on land

   Vertebrate systematists are reevaluating the classification of amniotes

   A reptilian heritage is evident in all amniotes

   Birds began as feathered reptiles

   Mammals diversified extensively in the wake of the Cretaceous extinctions



PRIMATES AND THE EVOLUTION OF Homo Sapiens

   Primate evolution provides a context for understanding human origins

   Humanity is one very young twig on the vertebrate tree

Most of us are curious about our genealogies. On the personal level, we wonder about our family ancestry. As biology students, we are interested in retracing human ancestry within the broader scope of the evolutionary history of the entire animal kingdom. The questions we must ask are the following: What were our ancestors like? How are we related to other animals? What are our closest relatives? In this chapter, we trace the evolution of the vertebrates, the group that includes humans and their closest relatives. Mammals, birds, lizards, snakes, turtles, amphibians, and the various classes of fishes are all examples of vertebrates. They share many features unique to the vertebrates, including the backbone, a series of vertebrae for which the group is named. You can see this vertebrate hallmark in the above photograph of a snake skeleton. Our first step in tracking the vertebrate genealogy is to determine where vertebrates fit in the animal kingdom.




