
 Ecology provides a scientific context for evaluating environmental issues

The science of ecology should be distinguished from the informal use of the same word to refer to environmental concerns. And yet, we need to understand the often complicated and delicate relationships between organisms and their environments in order to address environmental problems.

Much of our current awareness about the environment had its beginnings in 1962 with Rachel Carson's Silent Spring (FIGURE 50.3). In that now-classic book, Carson warned that the widespread use of pesticides such as DDT was causing population declines in many nontarget organisms. Today, acid precipitation, localized famine aggravated by land misuse and population growth, the poisoning of soil and streams with toxic wastes, and the growing list of species extinct or endangered because of habitat destruction are just a few of the problems that threaten the home we share with millions of other forms of life.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 50-3. Rachel Carson. Although her Silent Spring, a book seminal to the modern environmental movement, focused on the biosphere's hangover from the pesticide DDT, Carson's message was much broader: "The 'control of nature' is a phrase conceived in arrogance, born of the Neanderthal age of biology and philosophy, when it was supposed that nature exists for the convenience of man."

Many influential ecologists, including David Schindler, the scientist you met in this unit's interview, recognize their responsibility to educate legislators and the general public about decisions that affect the environment. An important part of this responsibility is communicating the scientific complexity of environmental issues. Politicians and lawyers often want definitive answers to such environmental questions as, How much old-growth forest is needed to save spotted owls? While ecological studies can certainly provide essential information for making policy decisions on habitat preservation, responses to such questions often include further questions: How many owls must be saved? With what certainty must they be saved? How long can they survive in this amount of forest? Ecologists can help answer these questions so that the public can make informed decisions about environmental concerns.

Although our ecological information is always incomplete, we cannot abstain from making decisions until all the answers are known. A guiding principle here is the precautionary principle, which can be expressed simply as "Look before you leap" or "An ounce of protection is worth a pound of cure." Aldo Leopold, the famous wildlife conservationist, expressed the precautionary principle well when he wrote, "To keep every cog and wheel is the first precaution to intelligent tinkering."




