
 Mitosis in eukaryotes may have evolved from binary fission in bacteria

The complex cellular choreography of mitotic cell division solves the problem of correctly distributing copies of eukaryotic genomes to daughter cells. How did mitosis evolve? Given that prokaryotes preceded eukaryotes on Earth by billions of years, we might hypothesize that mitosis had its origins in simpler bacterial mechanisms of cell reproduction.

Prokaryotes (bacteria) reproduce by a type of cell division called binary fission, meaning literally "division in half." Most bacterial genes are carried on a single bacterial chromosome that consists of a circular DNA molecule and associated proteins. Although bacteria are smaller and simpler than eukaryotic cells, the problem of replicating their genomes in an orderly fashion and distributing the copies equally to two daughter cells is still formidable. The chromosome of the bacterium Escherichia coli, for example, when it is fully stretched out, is about 500 times longer than the length of the cell. Clearly, such a long chromosome must be highly coiled and folded within the cell--and it is.

Prokaryotes do not have mitotic spindles, so what brings about the separation of the two daughter chromosomes in a dividing bacterial cell? A hypothesis proposed in the 1960s suggested that separation of bacterial chromosomes results simply from the growth of new plasma membrane between two sites on the membrane where the chromosome copies are attached. Recent research, however, has challenged this model (FIGURE 12.10, p. 224). Rather than being a passive process, separation of daughter bacterial chromosomes involves active chromosomal movement. Once the DNA of the chromosome begins to replicate, the copies of the first replicated region--called the origin of replication--move apart rapidly. Using the techniques of modern DNA technology to tag the origins of replication with molecules that glow green in fluorescence microscopy (see TABLE 7.1), researchers have directly observed the movement of bacterial chromosomes. This movement is reminiscent of the poleward movements of the centromere regions of eukaryotic chromosomes during anaphase of mitosis, even though bacteria don't have mitotic spindles or even microtubules. How bacterial chromosomes move is still a mystery. The idea that prokaryotes might have molecules in any way like the microtubules and motor proteins used in eukaryotic mitosis is surprising and intriguing.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 12-10. Bacterial cell division (binary fission). The single, circular bacterial chromosome replicates, and the two copies move apart by an unknown mechanism. Meanwhile, the cell grows in size. When chromosomal replication is complete, the plasma membrane grows inward to divide the cell in two as a new cell wall is deposited between the daughter cells. The example shown here is the bacterium Escherichia coli.

While the bacterial chromosome is replicating, the cell is growing. When replication is complete and the bacterium has reached about twice its initial size, its plasma membrane grows inward, dividing the parent cell into two daughter cells. Each cell inherits a complete genome.

As eukaryotes evolved, along with their larger genomes and nuclear envelopes, the ancestral process of binary fission somehow gave rise to mitosis. FIGURE 12.11 traces a hypothesis for the stepwise evolution of mitosis. Possible intermediate stages are represented by two unusual types of nuclear division found in certain modern unicellular algae. In both types, the nuclear envelope remains intact. In dinoflagellates, replicated chromosomes are attached to the nuclear envelope and separate as it elongates prior to cell division. In diatoms, a spindle within the nucleus separates the chromosomes.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 12-11. A hypothesis for the evolution of mitosis. Researchers interested in the evolution of eukaryotic cell division have observed in modern organisms what they believe are mechanisms of division intermediate between the binary fission of bacteria and mitosis as it occurs in most eukaryotes. These schematic diagrams of a proposed evolutionary sequence do not show cell walls.




