
 Herbivores consume a small percentage of vegetation: the green world hypothesis

With so many primary consumers (herbivores) munching away on plants, how can we explain why most terrestrial ecosystems are actually quite green, boosting large standing crops of vegetation? According to the green world hypothesis, herbivores consume relatively little plant biomass because they are held in check by a variety of factors, including predators, parasites, and disease.

Let's look at some of the numbers that account for a green world. There is a total of about 83 &#160;X&#160; 1010 metric tons of carbon stored in the plant biomass of terrestrial ecosystems. And the global rate of terrestrial primary production is about 5 &#160;X&#160; 1010 metric tons of plant biomass per year. (If you return to the equation on p. 1207, you can now calculate the global turnover rate for Earth's vegetation.) On a global scale, herbivores consume less than 17%  of the total net annual production by plants. Thus, in general, herbivores are only a minor nuisance to plants. We do know that some herbivores have the potential to completely strip local vegetation over the short term; an example is the occasional ability of exploding gypsy moth populations to defoliate areas of forest in the northeastern United States. Such exceptions only heighten our curiosity about why Earth is so green.

The green world hypothesis proposes several factors that keep herbivores in check:

Plants have defenses against herbivores. These defenses include noxious chemicals, as we discussed in Chapter 39.

Nutrients, not energy supply, usually limit herbivores. Animals need certain nutrients, such as organic nitrogen (protein), that plants often supply in relatively small amounts. Even in a world of plentiful green energy, the growth and reproduction of many herbivores is limited by availability of essential nutrients, not by energy (calories; see Chapter 41).

Abiotic factors limit herbivores. Unfavorable seasonal changes in temperature and moisture are examples of abiotic factors that can set a carrying capacity for herbivores far below the number that would strip vegetation.

Intraspecific competition can limit herbivore numbers. Territorial behavior and other consequences of competition may maintain herbivores' population densities below what the vegetation could support with food.

Interspecific interactions check herbivore densities. The green world hypothesis postulates that predators, parasites, and disease are the most important factors limiting the growth of herbivore populations. This applies the top-down model of community structure (Chapter 53).

The relationship of herbivores to plants emphasizes the importance of trophic structure for understanding the dynamics of an ecosystem. We now redirect our focus from energy flow to the cycling of nutrients in ecosystems.




