
 Thermoregulation involves physiological and behavioral adjustments that balance heat gain and loss

For endotherms and for those ectotherms that thermoregulate, the essence of thermoregulation is management of the heat budget so that rates of heat gain are equal to rates of heat loss. If the heat budget gets out of balance, the animal will either become warmer or colder. Four general categories of adaptations help animals thermoregulate:

Adjusting the rate of heat exchange between the animal and its surroundings. Insulation, such as hair, feathers, and fat located just beneath the skin, reduces the flow of heat between an animal and its environment. Other mechanisms that regulate rates of heat exchange usually involve adaptations of the circulatory system. Many endotherms and some ectotherms can alter the amount of blood (and hence heat) flowing between the body core and the skin. Elevated blood flow in the skin normally results from vasodilation, an increase in the diameter of superficial blood vessels (those near the body surface) triggered by nerve signals that relax the muscles of the vessel walls. In endotherms, vasodilation usually warms the skin, increasing the transfer of body heat to a cool environment by radiation, conduction, and convection (see FIGURE 44.3). The reverse process, vasoconstriction, reduces blood flow and heat transfer by decreasing the diameter of superficial vessels.

Another circulatory adaptation is a special arrangement of blood vessels called a countercurrent heat exchanger that helps trap heat in the body core and is important in reducing heat loss in many endotherms (FIGURE 44.5). For example, marine mammals and many birds face the problem of losing large amounts of heat from their extremities, which are often immersed in cold water or in contact with ice or snow. Arteries carrying warm blood down the legs of a bird or the flippers of a dolphin are in close contact with veins conveying cool blood in the opposite direction, back toward the trunk of the body. This countercurrent arrangement facilitates heat transfer from arteries to veins along the entire length of the blood vessels. Near the end of the leg or flipper, where arterial blood has been cooled to far below the animal's core temperature, the artery can still transfer heat to the even colder blood of an adjacent vein (recall that heat moves from a warmer object to a cooler one). The venous blood can continue to absorb heat because it is passing warmer and warmer arterial blood traveling in the opposite direction. As the venous blood approaches the center of the body, it is almost as warm as the body core, minimizing the heat lost as a result of supplying blood to body parts immersed in cold water. In essence, heat in the arterial blood emerging from the body core is transferred directly to the returning venous blood, instead of being lost to the environment. In some species, blood can either go through the heat exchanger or bypass it in other blood vessels. The relative amount of blood that flows through the two different paths varies, adjusting the rate of heat loss as an animal's physiological state or environment changes.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 44-5. Countercurrent heat exchangers. (a) Many birds, such as this Canada goose, have countercurrent systems in their legs that reduce heat loss. The arteries carrying blood down the legs contact the veins that return blood to the body core. In a cold environment, the heat in warm arterial blood is transferred (black arrows) to venous blood returning to the body, instead of being lost to the environment. (b) In the flippers of marine mammals, such as this Pacific bottlenose dolphin, each artery is surrounded by several veins in a countercurrent arrangement that allows efficient heat exchange between arterial and venous blood.

Circulatory adaptations that reduce heat loss enable some endotherms to survive the most extreme winter conditions. For example, take another look at the arctic wolf in the photo on page 925. Wolves remain active in very cold weather. Thick fur coats help keep their bodies warm. Countercurrent heat exchangers keep a wolf's legs from freezing. But what mechanism restricts heat loss from the hairless, fleshy foot and toe pads, which lack insulation and are in contact with extremely cold snow or ice? By adjusting blood flow through the countercurrent exchangers and other vessels in the legs, wolves can keep their foot temperature just above 0&#176;C in freezing weather--cool enough to reduce heat loss but warm enough to prevent frostbite--even in environmental temperatures as low as -50&#176;C. If necessary, wolves can warm their feet to much higher temperatures--for example, if they need to lose the large quantities of metabolic heat produced during long-distance running.

Cooling by evaporative heat loss. Terrestrial animals lose water by evaporation across the skin and when they breathe. Water absorbs considerable heat when it evaporates, and some animals have adaptations that can greatly augment this cooling effect. For example, most mammals and birds can increase evaporation from the lungs by panting. Sweating or bathing to make the skin wet also enhances evaporative cooling (see FIGURE 3.4).

Behavioral responses. Both endotherms and ectotherms use behavioral responses, such as changes in posture or moving about in their environment, to control body temperature. Many terrestrial animals will bask in the sun or on warm rocks when cold or find cool, shaded, or damp areas when hot. Many ectotherms can maintain a very constant body temperature by these simple behaviors. More extreme behavioral adaptations in some animals include hibernation or migration to a more suitable climate.

Changing the rate of metabolic heat production. This fourth category of thermoregulatory adaptation applies only to endotherms, particularly mammals and birds. By means we will discuss in the next section, many species of mammals and birds can greatly increase their metabolic heat production when exposed to cold.




