
 Life on Earth originated between 3.5 and 4.0 billion years ago

Life began remarkably early in Earth's history, and those first organisms were ancestral to the great diversity of life we observe today. The organisms most familiar to us are macroscopic and multicellular -- mainly plants and animals. However, for the first three-quarters of evolutionary history, Earth's only organisms were microscopic and mostly unicellular.

The planet Earth formed about 4.5 billion years ago. However, it is unlikely that life could have survived on Earth for the first few hundred million years, because the planet was bombarded by huge rock bodies left over from the formation of the solar system. The impacts were colossal; one of them may have dislodged a chunk of Earth that became the moon. During this period of bombardment, the pounding generated enough heat to vaporize all the available water and prevent seas from forming. Most geologists now agree that this bombardment phase ended about 3.9 billion years ago.

The oldest known rocks on Earth's surface, located at a site called Isua, in Greenland, are 3.8 billion years old. Although there are some chemical clues in these rocks that life may have existed at the time, no one has yet found fossils of microorganisms in rocks so old. The oldest fossils of organisms that biologists have found so far are embedded in rocks from western Australia that are 3.5 billion years old. These microfossils resemble certain bacteria that still exist today (FIGURE 26.3). For bacteria so complex to have evolved by 3.5 billion years ago, it is a reasonable hypothesis that life originated much earlier, perhaps as early as 3.9 billion years ago, when Earth began to cool to a temperature at which liquid water could exist. We do know that prokaryotic life was already flourishing when Earth was still relatively young.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 26-3. Early and modern prokaryotes. Fossils in rocks older than about 500 million years escaped notice until about 40 years ago, partly because they are microscopic.




