
 The active site is an enzyme's catalytic center

In an enzymatic reaction, the substrate binds to the active site to form an enzyme-substrate complex (FIGURE 6.15). In most cases, the substrate is held in the active site by weak interactions, such as hydrogen bonds and ionic bonds. Side chains (R groups) of a few of the amino acids that make up the active site catalyze the conversion of substrate to product, and the product departs from the active site. The enzyme is then free to take another substrate molecule into its active site. The entire cycle happens so fast that a single enzyme molecule typically acts on about a thousand substrate molecules per second. Some enzymes are much faster. Enzymes, like other catalysts, emerge from the reaction in their original form. Therefore, very small amounts of enzyme can have a huge metabolic impact by functioning over and over again in catalytic cycles.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 6-15. The catalytic cycle of an enzyme. In this example, the enzyme sucrase catalyzes the hydrolysis of sucrose to glucose and fructose.

Most metabolic reactions are reversible, and an enzyme can catalyze both the forward and the reverse reactions. Which reaction prevails depends mainly on the relative concentrations of reactants and products; that is, the enzyme catalyzes the reaction in the direction of equilibrium.

Enzymes use a variety of mechanisms that lower activation energy and speed up a reaction. In reactions involving two or more reactants, the active site provides a template for the substrates to come together in the proper orientation for a reaction to occur between them. As the active site clutches the substrates with an induced fit, the enzyme may stress the substrate molecules, stretching and bending critical chemical bonds that must be broken during the reaction. Because EA is proportional to the difficulty of breaking bonds, distorting the substrate reduces the amount of thermal energy that must be absorbed to achieve a transition state.

The active site may also provide a microenvironment that is conducive to a particular type of reaction. For example, if the active site has amino acids with acidic side chains (R groups), the active site may be a pocket of low pH in an otherwise neutral cell. In such cases, an acidic amino acid may facilitate H+ transfer to the substrate as a key step in catalyzing the reaction. Still another mechanism of catalysis is the direct participation of the active site in the chemical reaction. Sometimes this process even involves brief covalent bonding between the substrate and a side chain of an amino acid of the enzyme. Subsequent steps of the reaction restore the side chains to their original states, so the active site is the same after the reaction as it was before.

The rate at which a given amount of enzyme converts substrate to product is partly a function of the initial concentration of the substrate: The more substrate molecules available, the more frequently they access the active sites of the enzyme molecules. However, there is a limit to how fast the reaction can be pushed by adding more substrate to a fixed concentration of enzyme. At some point, the concentration of substrate will be high enough that all enzyme molecules have their active sites engaged. As soon as the product exits an active site, another substrate molecule enters. At this substrate concentration, the enzyme is said to be saturated, and the rate of the reaction is determined by the speed at which the active site can convert substrate to product. When an enzyme population is saturated, the only way to increase productivity is to add more enzyme. Cells sometimes do this by making more enzyme molecules.




