
 Organisms depend on the cohesion of water molecules

Water molecules stick to each other as a result of hydrogen bonding. When water is in its liquid form, its hydrogen bonds are very fragile, about one-twentieth as strong as covalent bonds. They form, break, and re-form with great frequency. Each hydrogen bond lasts only a few trillionths of a second, but the molecules are constantly forming new bonds with a succession of partners. Thus, at any instant, a substantial percentage of all the water molecules are bonded to their neighbors, making water more structured than most other liquids. Collectively, the hydrogen bonds hold the substance together, a phenomenon called cohesion.

Cohesion due to hydrogen bonding contributes to the transport of water against gravity in plants. Water reaches the leaves through microscopic vessels that extend upward from the roots (FIGURE 3.2). Water that evaporates from a leaf is replaced by water from the vessels in the veins of the leaf. Hydrogen bonds cause water molecules leaving the veins to tug on molecules farther down in the vessel, and the upward pull is transmitted along the vessel all the way down to the roots. Adhesion, the clinging of one substance to another, also plays a role. Adhesion of water to the walls of the vessels helps counter the downward pull of gravity.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 3-2. Water transport in plants. Evaporation from leaves pulls water upward from the roots through microscopic tubes called xylem vessels, in this case located in the trunk of a tree. Cohesion due to hydrogen bonding helps hold together the column of water within a vessel. Adhesion of the water to the vessel wall also helps in resisting the downward pull of gravity.

Related to cohesion is surface tension, a measure of how difficult it is to stretch or break the surface of a liquid. Water has a greater surface tension than most other liquids. At the interface between water and air is an ordered arrangement of water molecules, hydrogen-bonded to one another and to the water below. This makes the water behave as though coated with an invisible film. We can observe the surface tension of water by slightly overfilling a drinking glass; the water will stand above the rim. Water's surface tension also allows us to skip rocks on a pond. In a more biological example, some animals can stand, walk, or run on water without breaking the surface (FIGURE 3.3).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 3-3. Walking on water. The high surface tension of water, resulting from the collective strength of its hydrogen bonds, allows the water strider to walk on a pond without breaking the surface.




