
 Chromatin structure is based on successive levels of DNA packing

Even bacterial DNA has packing. Typically containing only several million nucleotide pairs, the bacterial genome was once thought to be a naked circle of DNA without any particular folding pattern. Now we know that the DNA of the bacterial chromosome is associated with specific proteins and that it is coiled and looped in a complex but orderly manner.

Nevertheless, eukaryotic chromatin (FIGURE 19.1) is considerably more complex than bacterial chromatin. Eukaryotic DNA is precisely combined with a large amount of protein, and the resulting chromatin undergoes striking changes in the course of the cell cycle. During interphase, chromatin fibers are usually highly extended within the nucleus. When interphase cells are stained for light microscopy, the chromatin appears as a diffuse, colored mass. As you learned in Chapter 12, however, when a cell prepares for mitosis, its chromatin coils and folds up (condenses) to form a characteristic number of short, thick chromosomes that are distinguishable with the light microscope.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 19-1. Levels of chromatin packing. This series of diagrams and transmission electron micrographs depicts a current model for the progressive stages of DNA coiling and folding that culminate in a highly condensed metaphase chromosome.

Eukaryotic chromosomes contain an enormous amount of DNA relative to their condensed length. Each chromosome contains a single linear DNA double helix that, in humans, averages about 2 &#160;X&#160; 108 nucleotide pairs. If extended, such a DNA molecule would be about 6 cm long, thousands of times longer than the diameter of a cell nucleus. All this DNA--as well as the DNA of the other 45 human chromosomes--fits into the nucleus through an elaborate, multilevel system of DNA packing. FIGURE 19.1 (preceding page) shows a model for this packing.

Nucleosomes, or "Beads on a String"

Proteins called histones are responsible for the first level of DNA packing in eukaryotic chromatin. In fact, the mass of histone in chromatin is approximately equal to the mass of DNA. Histones have a high proportion of positively charged amino acids (lysine and arginine), and they bind tightly to the negatively charged DNA. (Recall that the phosphate groups of DNA give it a negative charge all along its length; see FIGURE 16.5.) The DNA-histone complex is chromatin in its most fundamental form. There are five types of histone. Histones are very similar from one eukaryote to another, and similar proteins are found even in bacteria. Apparently, the histone genes have been highly conserved during evolution.

In electron micrographs, unfolded chromatin has the appearance of beads on a string, as shown in FIGURE 19.1a. Each "bead" and its adjacent DNA form a nucleosome, the basic unit of DNA packing. The nucleosome bead consists of DNA wound around a protein core composed of two molecules each of four different types of histone: H2A, H2B, H3, and H4. A molecule of the fifth histone, called H1, attaches to the DNA near the bead when the chromatin undergoes the next level of packing.

The beaded string seems to remain essentially intact throughout the cell cycle. The histones leave the DNA only transiently during DNA replication, and they stay with the DNA during transcription. How can DNA be transcribed when it is wrapped around histones in nucleosomes? Researchers have learned that nucleosomes are dynamic structures. By changing shape and position, they can allow RNA-synthesizing polymerases to move along the DNA. Later in this chapter, we'll discuss some recent discoveries about the roles of nucleosomes in the regulation of gene expression.

Higher Levels of DNA Packing

The beaded string undergoes higher-order packing. This is clearest when the extended interphase chromatin condenses to produce the thickened, compact chromosomes we see during mitosis. In the laboratory, mitotic chromosomes can be isolated and unraveled to reveal several orders of chromatin coiling. FIGURE 19.1b-d illustrates the various structures in order of increasing compactness. With the aid of histone H1, the beaded string coils or folds to form a fiber roughly 30 nm in thickness, known as the 30-nm chromatin fiber (FIGURE 19.1b). The 30-nm fiber, in turn, forms loops called looped domains, which are attached to a chromosome scaffold made of nonhistone proteins. In a mitotic chromosome, the looped domains themselves coil and fold, further compacting all the chromatin to produce the characteristic metaphase chromosome you see in the micrograph at the bottom of FIGURE 19.1. We know that the packing steps are highly specific and precise, for particular genes always end up located at the same places in metaphase chromosomes.

Though interphase chromatin is generally much less condensed than the chromatin of mitotic chromosomes, it shows several of these same levels of higher-order packing. Much of the beaded string is compacted into a 30-nm fiber and then further folded into looped domains (as in the micrograph opening this chapter). Although an interphase chromosome lacks a discrete "scaffold," its looped domains seem to be attached to the nuclear lamina, on the inside of the nuclear envelope, and perhaps also to fibers of the nuclear matrix. These attachments may help organize regions of active transcription. The chromatin of each chromosome occupies a restricted area within the interphase nucleus, and the chromatin fibers of different chromosomes do not become entangled.

Even during interphase, portions of certain chromosomes in some cells exist in the highly condensed state represented in FIGURE 19.1d. This type of interphase chromatin, which is visible with a light microscope, is called heterochromatin, to distinguish it from the less compacted euchromatin ("true chromatin"). What is the function of this selective condensation in interphase cells? The formation of heterochromatin may be a sort of coarse adjustment in the control of gene expression, for heterochromatin DNA is not transcribed.




