
 Plants use multiple lines of defense against pathogens

A plant's first line of defense against infection is the physical barrier of the plant's "skin," the epidermis of the primary plant body and the periderm of the secondary plant body (see Chapter 35). This first defense system, however, is not impenetrable. Viruses, bacteria, and the spores and hyphae of fungi can enter the plant through injuries or through natural openings in the epidermis, such as stomata. Once a pathogen invades, the plant mounts a chemical attack as a second line of defense that kills the pathogens and prevents their spread from the site of infection. This second defense system is enhanced by the plant's inherited ability to recognize certain pathogens.

Gene-for-Gene Recognition

Plants are generally resistant to most pathogens. This is because plants have an innate ability to recognize invading pathogens and to mount successful defenses. In a converse manner, successful pathogens cause disease because they are able to evade recognition or suppress host defense mechanisms. Pathogens against which a plant has little specific defense are said to be virulent. They are the exceptions, for if they were not, then hosts and pathogens would soon perish together. A kind of "compromise" has coevolved between plants and most of their pathogens. In such cases, the pathogen gains enough access to its host to perpetuate itself without severely damaging or killing the plant. Such strains of pathogens are termed avirulent.

Specific resistance to a plant disease is based on what is called gene-for-gene recognition, because it depends on a precise match-up between a genetic allele in the plant and an allele in the pathogen. This occurs when a plant with specific dominant resistance alleles (R) recognizes those pathogens that possess complementary avirulence (Avr) alleles (FIGURE 39.30). Specific recognition induces expression of certain plant genes, the products of which mount a defense against the pathogen. If the plant host does not contain the appropriate R gene, the pathogen can invade and kill the plant. There are many pathogens, and plants have many R genes--Arabidopsis has at least several hundred.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 39-30. Gene-for-gene resistance of plants to pathogens. (a) Resistance occurs when the plant has a particular dominant R allele that corresponds to a specific dominant Avr allele in the pathogen. R genes probably code for specific receptors. Avr genes produce compounds that function in the pathogen but also act as ligands that bind specifically to the host-plant cell's receptors. Disease occurs if there is no gene-for-gene recognition because (b) the pathogen has no dominant Avr allele matching an R allele in the plant, (c) the plant has no dominant R allele matching an Avr allele in the pathogen, or (d) both pathogen and plant lack alleles upon which recognition could be based.

It is not the R and Avr genes themselves that interact, of course, but their products. The product of an R gene is probably a specific receptor protein inside a plant cell or at its surface. The Avr gene probably leads to production of some "signal" molecule from the pathogen, a ligand capable of binding specifically to the plant cell's receptor. The Avr product undoubtedly has some function upon which the pathogen itself depends, but the plant is able to "key" on this molecule as an announcement of the pathogen's presence. Binding of the ligand to the receptor triggers a signal-transduction pathway leading to a defense response in the infected plant tissue. This defense includes both an enhancement of the localized response at the site of infection and a more general systemic response of the whole plant.

Hypersensitive Response

Even if a plant is infected by a virulent strain of a pathogen--one for which that particular plant has no genetic resistance--the plant is able to mount a localized chemical attack in response to molecular signals released from cells damaged by the infection. Molecules called elicitors, often cellulose fragments called oligosaccharins released by cell-wall damage, induce the production of antimicrobial compounds called phytoalexins. Infection also activates genes that produce PR proteins (for pathogenesis-related). Some of these proteins are antimicrobial, attacking molecules in the cell wall of a bacterium, for example. Others may function as signals that spread "news" of the infection to nearby cells. Infection also stimulates cross-linking of molecules in the cell wall and deposition of lignin, responses that set up a local barricade that slows spread of the pathogen to other parts of the plant.

If the pathogen is avirulent based on an R-Avr match, the localized defense response is more vigorous and is called a hypersensitive response (abbreviated HR). There is an enhanced production of phytoalexins and PR proteins, and the "sealing" response that contains the infection is more effective. After cells at the site of infection mount their chemical defense and seal off the area, they destroy themselves. We can see the result of an HR as lesions on a leaf or other infected organ. As "sick" as such a leaf appears, it will survive, and its defense response will help protect the rest of the plant (FIGURE 39.31).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 39-31. Defense responses against an avirulent pathogen.

Systemic Acquired Resistance

The hypersensitive response, as you have learned, is localized and specific, a containment response based on gene-for-gene (R-Avr) recognition between host and pathogen. However, this defense response also includes production of chemical signals that "sound the alarm" of infection to the whole plant. Released from the site of infection, the alarm hormones are transported throughout the plant, stimulating production of phytoalexins and PR proteins. This response, called systemic acquired resistance (SAR), is nonspecific, providing protection against a diversity of pathogens for days (FIGURE 39.31).

A good candidate for one of the hormones responsible for activating SAR is salicylic acid. A modified form of this compound, acetylsalicylic acid, is the active ingredient in aspirin. Centuries before aspirin was sold as a pain reliever, some cultures had learned that chewing the bark of a willow tree (Salix) would lessen the pain of a toothache or headache. With the discovery of systemic acquired resistance, biologists have finally learned one function of salicylic acid in plants. Aspirin turns out to be a natural medicine in the plants that produce it, but with effects entirely different from the medicinal action in humans who consume the drug.

Plant biologists investigating disease resistance and other evolutionary adaptations of plants are getting to the heart of how a plant responds to internal and external signals. These scientists, along with thousands of other plant biologists working on other questions and millions of students experimenting with plants in biology courses, are all extending a centuries-old tradition of curiosity about the green organisms that feed the biosphere.




