
 Researchers study development in model organisms to identify general principles

Much of the early research on animal development focused on animals that lay their eggs in water, with amphibians, such as frogs, getting particular attention. Frogs have large eggs (2-3 mm in diameter) that are easy to observe and manipulate, and fertilization and development occur outside the mother's body. By studying these animals and others, biologists were able to work out a description of animal development at the macroscopic and microscopic levels, making a number of important discoveries in the process (see Chapter 47). Research on a variety of plants led to a basic understanding of plant development (see Chapter 35). When the primary research goal is to understand broad biological principles--of animal or plant development in this case--the organism chosen for study is called amodel organism.Researchers select model organisms that lend themselves to the study of a particular question and that are representative of a larger group. Frogs, for example, are useful model organisms for elucidating the role of cell movement in morphogenesis because frog development is easy to observe and fairly typical of vertebrate animals.

However, for the more recent research efforts aimed at uncovering the connections between genes and development, many developmental biologists have turned to organisms that are more convenient for genetic analysis. For developmental genetics, the criteria for choosing a model organism include, in addition to readily observable embryos, short generation times, relatively small genomes, and, ideally, preexisting knowledge about the organism and its genes. Several organisms have emerged as favorites, includingDrosophila, the nematodeC. elegans, the mouse, the zebrafish, and the plantArabidopsis(FIGURE 21.3).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 21-3. Model organisms.Each of these organisms offers particular advantages for research on the genetics of development.

First chosen as a model organism by the pioneering geneticist T. H. Morgan and intensively studied by generations of geneticists after him, the fruit flyDrosophila melanogasteris small and easily grown in the laboratory. As you read in Chapter 15,Drosophilahas a generation time of only two weeks and produces many offspring. Embryos develop outside the mother's body, an asset for developmental studies. And researchers can draw on a vast amount of information and experience relating to this animal's genes and other aspects of its biology. (The DNA sequence of its genome was completed in 2000.) One disadvantage of the fruit fly as a model organism for developmental research is that its early development is at least superficially quite different from the process depicted inFIGURE 21.2: The first rounds of mitosis occur without cytokinesis, leading to an early blastula containing a large number of nuclei within a single mass of cytoplasm. Nevertheless, research onDrosophiladevelopment has yielded deep insights into basic principles of animal development, as we will see.

The nematodeCaenorhabditis elegansnormally lives in soil but is easily grown in the laboratory in petri dishes. It is only about a millimeter long, has a simple, transparent body with only a few types of cells, and grows from zygote to mature adult in only three and a half days. One of its advantages for genetic studies is that its genome has been sequenced. Another is that most individuals are hermaphrodites, which produce both eggs and sperm. Hermaphrodites are convenient for genetic studies because recessive mutations are easy to detect. As with any diploid organism, an individual with a recessive mutation in only one copy of a gene will have the wild-type phenotype. But a researcher can quickly detect the mutation by allowing the worm to self-fertilize: One-fourth of the offspring will be homozygous for the mutant allele and have a mutant phenotype.

For developmental biologists, a further important feature ofC. elegansis that every adult hermaphrodite has exactly 959 somatic cells (some of which are fused together), and these cells arise from the zygote in virtually the same way for every individual. Using a microscope to follow all the cell divisions starting immediately after a zygote forms, biologists have been able to reconstruct the entire ancestry of every cell in the adult body, the organism's completecell lineage.A cell lineage diagram like the one inFIGURE 21.4(p. 406) is a type offate map, a representation of the fates of various parts of a developing embryo. (You'll see more fate maps in Chapter 47.)



Click image to enlarge



Fig 21-4. Cell lineage inC. elegans.The nematodeCaenorhabditis elegansis transparent at all stages of its development, making it possible for researchers to trace the lineage of every cell, from the zygote to the adult worm (LM). The diagram shows a detailed lineage only for the intestine, which is derived exclusively from one of the first four cells formed from the zygote. The intestinal cell lineage does not happen to include any programmed cell death, an important aspect of the lineages for some other parts of the animal.

Among vertebrates, two in particular lend themselves to the genetic analysis of development, the mouse and the zebrafish. The mouseMus musculushas a long history as a mammalian model, and much is known about its biology, including its genes. Moreover, researchers are now adept at manipulating mouse genes to make transgenic mice and mice in which particular genes are "knocked out" by mutation. But mice are complex animals with a genome as large as ours, and their embryos develop in the mother's uterus, hidden from view.

Many of the disadvantages of the mouse are absent in a newer vertebrate model, the zebrafishDanio rerio. These small fish (2-4 cm long) are easy to breed in the laboratory in large numbers, and transparent embryos develop outside the mother's body. Although the generation time is relatively long (two to four months), the early stages of development proceed quickly: By 24 hours after fertilization, most of the tissues and early versions of the organs have formed, and by two days a tiny fish hatches out of the egg case. Although the zebrafish genome is still being mapped and sequenced, researchers such as Nancy Hopkins (see the interview at the opening of this unit) have already identified many genes involved in the animal's development.

For studying the molecular genetics of plant development, researchers are focusing on a small weed calledArabidopsis thaliana(the common wall cress, a member of the mustard family). One of these plants can grow in a test tube and produce thousands of progeny after eight to ten weeks; as in Mendel's pea plants, each flower makes both ova and sperm (in pollen). For gene manipulation research, scientists can growArabidopsiscells in culture and get the cells to take up foreign DNA (genetic transformation). Another advantage ofArabidopsisis that it has a relatively small genome, about 100 million nucleotide pairs, which has already been sequenced.

Later in this chapter, you will learn about important discoveries that researchers have made using some of these model organisms.




