
 Community biodiversity measures the number of species and their relative abundance

The biodiversity of a community--the variety of different kinds of organisms that make up the community--has two components. One is species richness, or the total number of different species in the community. The other is the relative abundance of the different species. For example, imagine two small forest communities, each with 100 individuals distributed among four different tree species (A, B, C, and D) as follows:

Community 1: 25A, 25B, 25C, 25D

Community 2: 80A, 10B, 5C, 5D

The species richness is the same for both communities because they both contain four species, but the relative abundance is very different (FIGURE 53.21). You would easily notice the four different types of trees in community 1, but without looking carefully, you might see only the abundant species A in the second forest. Most observers would intuitively describe community 1 as the more diverse of the two communities. Indeed, ecologists measure biodiversity as heterogeneity, which considers both diversity factors: richness and relative abundance.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 53-21. Which forest is more diverse? Both forests have the same four tree species (A, B, C, and D). Thus, the two communities are equal in their species richness of trees. But if we factor in the relative abundance of species, then community 1 seems more diverse because of the more equitable representation of the different tree species. Ecologists would say that community 1 has greater heterogeneity, a measure of diversity that includes both species number (richness) and relative abundance.

Counting species in a community to determine their number and relative abundances is easier said than done, especially for insects and other small organisms. The counts usually involve sampling techniques. But sample sizes are generally small, leading to large sampling errors, because most species in a community are relatively rare. FIGURE 53.22 illustrates this problem for a study of butterfly and moth biodiversity in a community. And measuring biodiversity is relatively easy when we are counting birds and butterflies. It is much harder to count the less charismatic members of communities, such as mites and nematodes.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 53-22. Relative abundance of Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths) captured in a light trap in Rothamsted, England. The trap caught a total of 6,814 individuals, representing 197 species. The six most common species accounted for 50 percent of the total catch. In fact, a single species accounted for 1,799 of the 6,814 moths (note that this most common species is "off-scale" on the graph, which does not extend much beyond species represented by about 40 individuals). The main point of the graph is that the majority of species are rare. For example, 37 of the 197 total species were represented in the catch by only a single specimen.

Challenging as it is to measure biodiversity in a community--even for just one taxonomic category, such as butterflies--it is very important work. Measuring biodiversity is essential for conservation biology, since we need an inventory of what we hope to protect. Though there is a tendency in biology to focus on individual species, community ecologists tend to lump the species into broader categories, such as the bird species or the tree species of an area. We can use this community-based approach to look for large-scale patterns in the biogeography of biodiversity.




