
 Embryonic development involves cell division, cell differentiation, and morphogenesis

An organism arises from a fertilized egg cell as the result of three interrelated processes: cell division, cell differentiation, and morphogenesis (FIGURE 21.1). Through a succession of mitotic divisions, the zygote gives rise to a large number of cells. Cell division alone, however, would produce only a great ball of identical cells, nothing like an animal or plant. During embryonic development, cells not only increase in number, but also undergodifferentiation,becoming specialized in structure and function. Moreover, the different kinds of cells aren't just mixed up randomly but are organized into tissues and organs. The physical processes that give an organism its shape constitutemorphogenesis,meaning "creation of form."



Click image to enlarge



Fig 21-1. From fertilized egg to animal: what a difference a week makes.It took just one week for cell division, differentiation, and morphogenesis to transform this fertilized frog egg(a)into a hatching tadpole(b).

The processes of cell division, differentiation, and morphogenesis overlap in time. Early events of morphogenesis lay out the basic body plan very early in embryonic development, establishing, for example, which end of an animal embryo will be the head or which end of a plant embryo will become the roots. Cell division and differentiation play important roles in morphogenesis in all organisms, as does the programmed death of certain cells. However, the overall schemes of morphogenesis in animals and plants are very different, and the mechanisms differ in two major ways (FIGURE 21.2, p. 404). First, in animals, but not in plants,movementsof cells and tissues are necessary to transform the early embryo into the characteristic three-dimensional form of the organism. We will discuss these morphogenetic movements in Chapter 47. The second major difference is that in plants, morphogenesis and growth in overall size are not limited to embryonic and juvenile periods but occur throughout the life of the plant.Apical meristems,which are perpetually embryonic regions in the tips of shoots and roots, are responsible for the plant's continual growth and formation of new organs, such as leaves and roots. In animals, ongoing development in adults is restricted to the differentiation of cells, such as blood cells, that must be continually replenished throughout the animal's lifetime.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 21-2. Some key stages of development in animals and plants.Cell division, morphogenesis, and cell differentiation occur in both animal development and plant development.(a)Most animals go through some variation of the blastula and gastrula stages shown here in simplified form. The blastula is a sphere of cells surrounding a fluid-filled cavity. In forming the gastrula, a region of the blastula folds inward, forming a rudimentary gut cavity. The movement of cells and tissues plays an important role in animal morphogenesis. Biochemical events that will lead to cellular differentiation actually start before the gastrula forms. Once the animal is mature, differentiation occurs in only a limited way--for the replacement of damaged or lost cells.(b)In plants with seeds, a complete embryo develops within the seed. Morphogenesis, which does not involve cell or tissue movement, occurs throughout the plant's lifetime. Apical meristems (yellow) continuously arise and develop into the various plant organs as the plant grows to an indeterminate size.

The importance of precise regulation of morphogenesis is evident in human disorders that result from morphogenesis gone awry. For example, cleft palate, in which the upper wall of the mouth cavity fails to close completely, is a defect of morphogenesis.

As humans, we may naturally be most interested in developmental processes in our own species. However, many aspects of development are much easier to study in other kinds of organisms.




