
 The modern evolutionary synthesis integrated Darwinian selection and Mendelian inheritance

Ironically, when Mendel's research article was rediscovered and reassessed at the beginning of the 20th century, many geneticists believed that the laws of inheritance were at odds with Darwin's theory of natural selection. Darwin considered the raw material for natural selection to be quantitative characters, those characteristics in a population that vary along a continuum, such as fur length in mammals or the speed with which an animal can flee from a predator. We know today that quantitative characters are influenced by multiple genetic loci. (To review polygenic inheritance and quantitative characters, see Chapter 14.) But Mendel (and later the geneticists of the early 20th century) recognized only discrete "either-or" traits, such as purple or white flowers in pea plants, as heritable. Thus, there seemed to be no genetic basis for natural selection to work on the more subtle variations within a population that were central to Darwin's theory.

An important turning point for evolutionary theory was the birth of population genetics, which emphasizes the extensive genetic variation within populations and recognizes the importance of quantitative characters. With progress in population genetics in the 1930s, Mendelism and Darwinism were reconciled, and the genetic basis of variation and natural selection was worked out.

A comprehensive theory of evolution that became known as the modern synthesis began to take form in the early 1940s. It is called a synthesis because it integrates discoveries and ideas from many different fields, including paleontology, taxonomy, biogeography, and, of course, population genetics. The architects of this modern synthesis included geneticists Theodosius Dobzhansky (1900-1975) and Sewall Wright (1889-1988), biogeographer and taxonomist Ernst Mayr (1904-), paleontologist George Gaylord Simpson (1902-1984), and botanist G. Ledyard Stebbins (1906-2000). The modern synthesis emphasizes the importance of populations as the units of evolution, the central role of natural selection as the most important mechanism of evolution, and the idea of gradualism to explain how large changes can evolve as an accumulation of small changes occurring over long periods of time. No scientific paradigm is likely to endure without modification for half a century. Many evolutionary biologists are now challenging some of the assumptions of the modern synthesis. Still, 20th-century biology has been profoundly affected by the modern synthesis, which has shaped most of our ideas about how populations evolve.




