
 Most evolutionary novelties are modified versions of older structures

We can extend the Darwinian concept of "descent with modification" to account for the major morphological transformations of macroevolution. In some cases, very complex structures evolved in increments from much simpler versions that had the same basic function. For example, the human eye is a refined optical organ constructed from multiple parts that work together in forming an image and sending that visual information to the brain. Many people find it hard to believe that such complex organs could be products of gradual evolution rather than finished designs created especially for humans. If the eye needs all its parts to work, the argument goes, how could a partial eye be of any use as an evolutionary stage? The fallacy is in the starting assumption that eyes have to be this complicated to be useful to an animal. The most basic versions of eyes are just clusters of photoreceptor cells, pigmented cells sensitive to light. Only slightly more refined are the eyes of the flatworms called planarians, which have their photoreceptor cells lining cup-shaped indentations on the head. These eyecups have no lenses or other equipment for focusing images, but they do enable the animal to distinguish light from dark; planarians move away from light, a behavioral adaptation that probably reduces the risk of being eaten.

Complex eyes of various types evolved independently from simpler ones many times in the animal kingdom. For example, some mollusks (members of the invertebrate phylum Mollusca), including squids and octopuses, have eyes every bit as complex as those of humans and other vertebrates. Among living mollusks, we can find eyes ranging in complexity from clusters of photoreceptors to camera-like eyes with lenses (FIGURE 24.18). Considering the long success of many so-called "primitive" animals with simple eyecups, such as flatworms and certain mollusks, it is clear that eyecups work fine for what these animals have to do to survive and reproduce. In those animals that do have complex eyes, the organs evolved from simpler ones not in one quantum evolutionary jump, but by incremental adaptation of organs that worked and benefited their owners at each stage of this macroevolution.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 24-18. A range of eye complexity among mollusks. (a) The limpet Patella has a simple patch of pigmented cells (photoreceptors). (b) The slit shell mollusk Pleurotomaria has an eyecup.(c) The Nautilus eye functions like a pinhole camera (an early type of camera lacking a lens). A thick fluid in a cavity helps focus light onto the retina, a layer of photoreceptors. (d) The eye of Murex, a marine snail, has a primitive lens consisting of a mass of crystal-like cells. The cornea is a transparent region of epithelium (outer skin) that protects the eye and helps focus light. (e) The squid Loligo has a complex "camera-Light" type eye with a cornea, lens, and retina.

The evolution of the eye refined organs that retained the basic function of vision. But evolutionary novelty can also arise by the gradual refinement of existing structures for new functions. Such structures that evolve in one context but become co-opted for another function are called exaptations. This concept does not imply that a structure somehow evolves in anticipation of future use. Natural selection cannot predict the future and can only improve a structure in the context of its current utility. The lightweight, honeycombed bones of birds (see FIGURE 1.6b) are homologous to the bones of the earthbound ancestors of birds. However, honeycombed bones could not have evolved in the ancestors as an adaptation for upcoming flights. If light bones predated flight, as is clearly indicated by the fossil record, then they must have had some function on the ground. The probable ancestors of birds were relatively small, agile, bipedal dinosaurs that also would have benefited from a light frame. It is possible that winglike forelimbs and feathers, which increased the surface area of these forelimbs, were also co-opted for flight after functioning in some other capacity, such as social displays--in courtship, for example. The first flights may have been only extended hops in pursuit of prey or escape from a predator. Once flight itself became an advantage, natural selection would have remodeled feathers and wings to better fit their additional function.

Exaptation offers one explanation for how novel features can arise gradually through a series of intermediate stages, each of which has some function in the organism's current context. Harvard zoologist Karel Liem puts it this way: "Evolution is like modifying a machine while it's running."




