
 The efficiency of energy transfer between trophic levels is usually less than 20% 

Production Efficiency

One way to start thinking about secondary production is to examine the process in individual organisms. Caterpillars feed on plant leaves, and FIGURE 54.10 is a simplified diagram of how the energy a caterpillar obtains from food is partitioned. Out of 200 J (48 cal) consumed by a caterpillar, only about 33 J (one-sixth) is used for growth. The caterpillar passes the rest as feces or uses it for cellular respiration. The energy contained in the feces is not lost from the ecosystem, as it will be consumed by detritivores. However, the energy used for respiration is lost from the ecosystem as heat. Energy pours into an ecosystem as solar radiation and drains away as respiratory heat loss. This is why energy is said to flow through, not cycle within, ecosystems. Only the chemical energy stored as growth (or the production of offspring) by herbivores is available as food to secondary consumers. And our example actually overestimates the conversion of primary production to secondary production because we did not account for all the plant material that herbivores do not even consume. The greenness of terrestrial landscapes due to an abundance of plant material indicates that most net primary production is not converted over the short term to secondary production.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 54-10. Energy partitioning within a link of the food chain. Less than 17%  of the caterpillar's food is actually converted to caterpillar biomass.

If we view animals as energy transformers, we can ask questions about their relative efficiencies. This is the efficiency measure we'll use: 

Net secondary production is the energy stored in biomass represented by growth and reproduction. Assimilation consists of the total energy taken in and used for growth, reproduction, and respiration. In other words, production efficiency is the fraction of food energy that is not used for respiration. For the caterpillar in FIGURE 54.10, production efficiency is 33% ; 67 J of the 100 J of assimilated energy is used for respiration (note that energy lost as undigestible material in feces does not count as assimilation). Birds and mammals have low production efficiencies, ranging from 1-3% , because they use so much energy to maintain a warm body temperature. Fishes, which are ectotherms (see Chapter 40), have a production efficiency around 10% . Insects are even more efficient, with production efficiencies averaging 40% .

Trophic Efficiency and Ecological Pyramids

Let's scale up now from the production efficiencies of individual consumers to the flow of energy through whole trophic levels.

Trophic efficiency is the percentage of production transferred from one trophic level to the next. Put another way, trophic efficiency is the fraction of net production at one trophic level as a percent of net production at the level below. Trophic efficiencies must always be less than production efficiencies because they take into account not only the energy lost through respiration and materials in feces, but also the energy in organic material in a lower trophic level that is not consumed by the next trophic level. Trophic efficiencies usually range from 5-20% , depending on the type of ecosystem. In other words, 80-95%  of the energy available at one trophic level never transfers to the next. And this loss is multiplied over the length of a food chain. If 10%  of energy is transferred from primary producers to primary consumers, and 10%  of that energy is transferred to secondary consumers, then only 1%  of net primary production is available to secondary consumers (10%  of 10% ).

Pyramids of Production. This multiplicative loss of energy from a food chain can be represented by a pyramid of production, in which the trophic levels are stacked in blocks, with primary producers forming the foundation of the pyramid. The size of each block is proportional to the production of each trophic level (FIGURE 54.11).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 54-11. An idealized pyramid of net production. This example is based on a trophic efficiency of 10%  for each link in the food chain. Notice that primary producers convert only about 1%  of the energy in the sunlight available to them into net primary production.

Pyramids of Biomass. One important ecological consequence of low trophic efficiencies can be represented in a biomass pyramid, in which each tier represents the standing crop (the total dry weight of all organisms) in a trophic level. Most biomass pyramids narrow sharply from primary producers at the base to top-level carnivores at the apex because energy transfers between trophic levels are so inefficient (FIGURE 54.12a). Some aquatic ecosystems, however, have inverted biomass pyramids, with primary consumers outweighing producers. In the waters of the English Channel, for example, the biomass of zooplankton (consumers) is five times the weight of phytoplankton (producers) (FIGURE 54.12b). Such inverted biomass pyramids occur because the zooplankton consume the phytoplankton so quickly that the producers never develop a large population size, or standing crop. Instead, the phytoplankton grow, reproduce, and are consumed rapidly. Phytoplankton have a short turnover time, which means they have a small standing crop biomass compared to their production:  Because the phytoplankton continue to replace their biomass at such a rapid rate, they can support a biomass of zooplankton bigger than their own biomass. Nevertheless, the pyramid of production for this ecosystem is upright, like the one in FIGURE 54.11, because phytoplankton have a much higher production than zooplankton.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 54-12. Pyramids of biomass (standing crop). Numbers denote the dry weight (g/m2) for all organisms at a trophic level.

Pyramids of Numbers. The multiplicative loss of energy from food chains severely limits the overall biomass of top-level carnivores that any ecosystem can support. Only about one one-thousandth of the chemical energy fixed by photosynthesis can flow all the way through a food web to a tertiary consumer, such as a hawk, snake, or shark (see FIGURE 54.11). This explains why food webs usually include only about four or five trophic levels (see Chapter 53).

Because predators are usually larger than the prey they eat, top-level predators tend to be fairly large animals. Thus, the limited biomass at the top of an ecological pyramid is concentrated in a relatively small number of large individuals. This phenomenon is reflected in a pyramid of numbers, in which the size of each block is proportional to the number of individual organisms present in each trophic level (FIGURE 54.13). Populations of top predators are typically small, and the animals may be widely spaced within their habitats. As a result, many predators are highly susceptible to extinction (as well as to the evolutionary consequences of small population size discussed in Chapter 23).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 54-13. A pyramid of numbers. In this pyramid of numbers for a bluegrass field in Michigan, only three top carnivores are supported in an ecosystem based on production by nearly 6 million plants.

The dynamics of energy flow through ecosystems have important implications for the human population. Eating meat is a relatively inefficient way of tapping photosynthetic production. A human obtains far more calories by eating grains directly as a primary consumer than by processing that same amount of grain through another trophic level and eating grain-fed animals (beef, chicken, pork, lamb, farm fish). Worldwide agriculture could, in fact, successfully feed many more people than it does today if we all consumed only plant material, feeding more efficiently as primary consumers (FIGURE 54.14).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 54-14. Food energy available to the human population at different trophic levels. Most humans have a diet between these two extremes.




