
 Most invertebrates have a gastrovascular cavity or a circulatory system for internal transport

Gastrovascular Cavities

The body plan of a hydra and other cnidarians makes a circulatory system unnecessary. A body wall only two cells thick encloses a central gastrovascular cavity, which serves for both digestion and for distribution of substances throughout the body (see FIGURE 41.11). The fluid inside the cavity is continuous with the water outside through a single opening; thus, both inner and outer tissue layers are bathed by fluid. Thin branches of the gastrovascular cavity extend into the tentacles of a hydra, and some cnidarians have even more elaborate gastrovascular cavities (FIGURE 42.1). Since digestion begins in the cavity, only the cells of the inner layer have direct access to nutrients, but the nutrients have only a short distance to diffuse to the cells of the outer layer.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-1. Internal transport in the cnidarian Aurelia. The mouth leads to an elaborate gastrovascular cavity (shown in blue) that has branches radiating to and from a circular canal. Ciliated cells lining the canals circulate fluid in the directions indicated by the arrows. The animal is viewed here from its underside (oral surface).

Planarians and most other flatworms also have gastrovascular cavities that exchange materials with the environment through a single opening (see FIGURE 33.10). The flat shape of the body and the branching of the gastrovascular cavity throughout the animal ensure that all cells are bathed by a suitable medium and diffusion distances are short.

Open and Closed Circulatory Systems

For animals with many cell layers, gastrovascular cavities are insufficient for internal transport because diffusion distances are too great for adequate exchange of nutrients and wastes. In these more complex animals, two types of circulatory systems that overcome the limitations of diffusion have evolved: open circulatory systems and closed circulatory systems. Both have three basic components: a circulatory fluid (blood), a set of tubes (blood vessels) through which the blood moves through the body, and a muscular pump (the heart). The heart powers circulation by using metabolic energy to elevate the hydrostatic pressure of the blood, which then flows down a pressure gradient through its circuit and then back to the heart. This blood pressure is the motive force for fluid movement in the circulatory system.

In insects, other arthropods, and most mollusks, blood bathes the organs directly in an open circulatory system (FIGURE 42.2a). There is no distinction between blood and interstitial fluid, and the general body fluid is more correctly termed hemolymph. One or more hearts pump the hemolymph into an interconnected system of sinuses, which are spaces surrounding the organs. Here, chemical exchange occurs between the hemolymph and body cells. In insects and other arthropods, the heart is an elongated tube located dorsally. When the heart contracts, it pumps hemolymph through vessels out into sinuses. When the heart relaxes, it draws hemolymph into the circulatory system through pores called ostia. Body movements that squeeze the sinuses help circulate the hemolymph.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-2. Open and closed circulatory systems.

In a closed circulatory system, blood is confined to vessels and is distinct from the interstitial fluid (FIGURE 42.2b). One or more hearts pump blood into large vessels that branch into smaller ones coursing through the organs. Here, materials are exchanged by diffusion between the blood and the interstitial fluid bathing the cells. Earthworms, squids, octopuses, and vertebrates have closed circulatory systems.




