
 Mendel brought an experimental and quantitative approach to genetics

Mendel grew up on his parents' small farm in a region of Austria that is now part of the Czech Republic. At school in this agricultural area, Mendel and the other children received agricultural training along with basic education. Later, Mendel overcame financial hardship and illness to excel in high school and at the Olmutz Philosophical Institute.

In 1843, Mendel entered an Augustinian monastery. After three years of theological studies, he was assigned to a school as a temporary teacher but failed the teacher's examination. An administrator sent Mendel to the University of Vienna, where he studied from 1851 to 1853. These were very important years for Mendel's development as a scientist. Two professors were especially influential. One was the physicist Doppler, who encouraged his students to learn science through experimentation and trained Mendel to use mathematics to help explain natural phenomena. The second was a botanist named Unger, who aroused Mendel's interest in the causes of variation in plants. These influences came together in Mendel's subsequent experiments with garden peas.

After attending the university, Mendel was assigned to teach at the Br&uuml;nn Modern School, where several teachers shared his enthusiasm for scientific research. At the monastery where Mendel lived, he also found stimulating colleagues, many of them university professors and active researchers. Moreover, there had been a long tradition of interest in the breeding of plants, including peas, at the monastery. Thus, it was probably not extraordinary when, around 1857, Mendel began breeding garden peas in the abbey garden in order to study inheritance. What was extraordinary was Mendel's fresh approach to very old questions about heredity.

Mendel probably chose to work with peas because they are available in many varieties. For example, one variety has purple flowers, while another variety has white flowers. Geneticists use the term character for a heritable feature, such as flower color, that varies among individuals. Each variant for a character, such as purple or white color for flowers, is called a trait.

The use of peas also gave Mendel strict control over which plants mated with which. The sex organs of a pea plant are in its flowers, and each pea flower has both male and female organs--stamens and carpel, respectively. In nature, the plants usually self-fertilize: Pollen grains released from the stamens land on the carpel of the same flower, and sperm from the pollen fertilize ova in the carpel. To achieve cross-pollination (fertilization between different plants), Mendel removed the immature stamens of a plant before they produced pollen and then dusted pollen from another plant onto the emasculated flowers (FIGURE 14.1). Each resulting zygote then developed into a plant embryo encased in a seed (pea). Whether ensuring self-pollination or executing artificial cross-pollination, Mendel could always be sure of the parentage of new seeds.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 14-1. A genetic cross. To mate (hybridize) two varieties of pea plants, Mendel used an artist's brush to transfer sperm-bearing pollen from one plant to the egg-bearing carpel of another. In this example, the character of interest is flower color. When pollen from a white flower fertilizes ova of a purple flower, the first-generation hybrids all have purple flowers. The result is the same for the reciprocal cross, the transfer of pollen from purple flowers to white flowers.

Mendel chose to track only those characters that varied in an "either-or" rather than a "more-or-less" manner. For example, his plants had either purple flowers or white flowers; there was nothing intermediate between these two varieties. Had Mendel focused instead on characters that vary in a continuum among individuals--seed weight, for example--he would not have discovered the particulate nature of inheritance.

Mendel also made sure he started his experiments with varieties that were true-breeding, which means that when the plants self-pollinate, all their offspring are of the same variety. For example, a plant with purple flowers is true-breeding if the seeds produced by self-pollination all give rise to plants that also have purple flowers.

In a typical breeding experiment, Mendel would cross-pollinate two contrasting, true-breeding pea varieties--for example, purple-flowered plants and white-flowered plants (see FIGURE 14.1). This mating, or crossing, of two true-breeding varieties is called hybridization. The true-breeding parents are referred to as the P generation (parental generation), and their hybrid offspring are the F1 generation (first filial generation, the word filial from the Latin word for "son"). Allowing these F1 hybrids to self-pollinate produces an F2 generation (second filial generation). Mendel usually followed traits for at least these three generations: the P, F1, and F2 generations. Had Mendel stopped his experiments with the F1 generation, the basic patterns of inheritance would have eluded him. It was mainly Mendel's quantitative analysis of F2 plants that revealed the two fundamental principles of heredity that are now known as the law of segregation and the law of independent assortment.




