
 Organisms are sensitive to changes in pH

Before discussing the pH scale, let's see what acids and bases are and how they interact with water.

Acids and Bases

What would cause an aqueous solution to have an imbalance in its H+ and OH- concentrations? When the substances called acids dissolve in water, they donate additional H1 to the solution. An acid, according to the definition most often used by biologists, is a substance that increases the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution. For example, when hydrochloric acid (HCl) is added to water, hydrogen ions dissociate from chloride ions: 

This additional source of H+ (dissociation of water is the other source) results in the solution having more H+ than OH-. Such a solution is known as an acidic solution.

A substance that reduces the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution is called a base. Some bases reduce the H+ concentration directly by accepting hydrogen ions. Ammonia (NH3), for instance, acts as a base when the unshared electron pair in nitrogen's valence shell attracts a hydrogen ion from the solution, resulting in an ammonium ion (NH4+):

Other bases reduce the H+ concentration indirectly by dissociating to form hydroxide ions, which then combine with hydrogen ions in the solution to form water. One base that acts this way is sodium hydroxide (NaOH), which in water dissociates into its ions:  In either case, the base reduces the H+ concentration. Solutions with a higher concentration of OH- than H+ are known as basic solutions. A solution in which the H+ and OH- concentrations are equal is said to be neutral.

Notice that single arrows were used in the reactions for HCl and NaOH. These compounds dissociate completely when mixed with water. Hydrochloric acid is called a strong acid and sodium hydroxide a strong base because they dissociate completely. In contrast, ammonia is a relatively weak base. The double arrows in the reaction for ammonia indicate that the binding and release of the hydrogen ion are reversible, although at equilibrium there will be a fixed ratio of NH4+ to NH3.

There are also weak acids, which reversibly release and reaccept hydrogen ions. An example is carbonic acid, which has essential functions in many organisms:  Here the equilibrium so favors the reaction in the left direction that when carbonic acid is added to water, only 1% of the molecules are dissociated at any particular time. Still, that is enough to shift the balance of H+ and OH- from neutrality.

The pH Scale

In any solution, the product of the H+ and OH- concentrations is constant at 10-14. This can be written  In such an equation, brackets indicate molar concentration for the substance enclosed within them. In a neutral solution at room temperature (25&#176;C), [H+] = 10-7 and [OH-] = 10-7, so in this case, 10-14 is the product of 10-7&#160;X&#160; 10-7. If enough acid is added to a solution to increase [H+] to 10-5M, then [OH-] will decline by an equivalent amount to 10-9M (note that 10-5&#160;X&#160; 10-9 = 10-14). This constant relationship expresses the behavior of acids and bases in a solution. An acid not only adds hydrogen ions to a solution, but also removes hydroxide ions because of the tendency for H+ to combine with OH- to form water. A base has the opposite effect, increasing OH- concentration but also reducing H+ concentration by the formation of water. If enough of a base is added to raise the OH- concentration to 10-4M, the H+ concentration will drop to 10-10M. Whenever we know the concentration of either H+ or OH- in a solution, we can deduce the concentration of the other ion.

Because the H+ and OH- concentrations of solutions can vary by a factor of 100 trillion or more, scientists have developed a way to express this variation more conveniently than in moles per liter. The pH scale, which ranges from 0 to 14 (FIGURE 3.9), compresses the range of H+ and OH- concentrations by employing logarithms. The pH of a solution is defined as the negative logarithm (base 10) of the hydrogen ion concentration: 



Click image to enlarge



Fig 3-9. The pH of some aqueous solutions.

For a neutral solution, [H+] is 10-7M, giving us 

Notice that pH declines as H+ concentration increases. Notice, too, that although the pH scale is based on H+ concentration, it also implies OH- concentration. A solution of pH 10 has a hydrogen ion concentration of 10-10M and a hydroxide ion concentration of 10-4M.

The pH of a neutral solution is 7, the midpoint of the scale. A pH value less than 7 denotes an acidic solution; the lower the number, the more acidic the solution. The pH for basic solutions is above 7. Most biological fluids are within the range pH 6 to pH 8. There are a few exceptions, however, including the strongly acidic digestive juice of the human stomach, which has a pH of about 2.

It is important to remember that each pH unit represents a tenfold difference in H+ and OH- concentrations. It is this mathematical feature that makes the pH scale so compact. A solution of pH 3 is not twice as acidic as a solution of pH 6, but a thousand times more acidic. When the pH of a solution changes slightly, the actual concentrations of H+ and OH- in the solution change substantially.

Buffers

The internal pH of most living cells is close to 7. Even a slight change in pH can be harmful, because the chemical processes of the cell are very sensitive to the concentrations of hydrogen and hydroxide ions.

Thanks to the presence of buffers, biological fluids resist changes to their own pH when acids or bases are introduced. Buffers are substances that minimize changes in the concentrations of H+ and OH- in a solution. For example, buffers normally maintain the pH of human blood very close to 7.4. A person cannot survive for more than a few minutes if the blood pH drops to 7 or rises to 7.8. Under normal circumstances, the buffering capacity of the blood prevents such swings in pH.

A buffer works by accepting hydrogen ions from the solution when they are in excess and donating hydrogen ions to the solution when they have been depleted. Most buffer solutions contain a weak acid and its corresponding base, which combine reversibly with hydrogen ions. One of the buffers that contribute to pH stability in human blood and many other biological solutions is carbonic acid (H2CO3), which, as already mentioned, dissociates to yield a bicarbonate ion (HCO3-) and a hydrogen ion (H+): 

The chemical equilibrium between carbonic acid and bicarbonate acts as a pH regulator, the reaction shifting left or right as other processes in the solution add or remove hydrogen ions. If the H+ concentration in blood begins to fall (that is, if pH rises), more carbonic acid dissociates, replenishing hydrogen ions. But when H+ concentration in blood begins to rise (pH drops), the bicarbonate ion acts as a base and removes the excess hydrogen ions from the solution. Thus, the carbonic acid-bicarbonate buffering system consists of an acid and a base in equilibrium with each other. Most other buffers are also acid-base pairs.




