
 In the genetic code, nucleotide triplets specify amino acids

When biologists began to suspect that the instructions for protein synthesis were encoded in DNA, they recognized a problem: There are only four nucleotides to specify 20 amino acids. Thus, the genetic code cannot be a language like Chinese, where each written symbol corresponds to a single word. If each nucleotide base were translated into an amino acid, only 4 of the 20 amino acids could be specified. Would a language of two-letter code words suffice? The base sequence AG, for example, could specify one amino acid, and GT could specify another. Since there are four bases, this would give us 16 (that is, 42) possible arrangements--still not enough to code for all 20 amino acids.

Triplets of nucleotide bases are the smallest units of uniform length that can code for all the amino acids. If each arrangement of three consecutive bases specifies an amino acid, there can be 64 (that is, 43) possible code words--more than enough to specify all the amino acids. Experiments have verified that the flow of information from gene to protein is based on a triplet code: The genetic instructions for a polypeptide chain are written in the DNA as a series of three-nucleotide words. For example, the base triplet AGT at a particular position along a DNA strand results in the placement of the amino acid serine at the corresponding position of the polypeptide to be produced.

As you know, a cell does not directly translate a gene into amino acids. The intermediate step is transcription, during which the gene determines the sequence of base triplets along the length of an mRNA molecule. For each gene, only one of the two DNA strands is transcribed (FIGURE 17.3). This strand is called the template strand, because it provides the template for ordering the sequence of nucleotides in an RNA transcript. A given DNA strand can be the template strand in some regions of a DNA molecule, while in other regions along the double helix it is the complementary strand that functions as the template for RNA synthesis.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 17-3. The triplet code. For each gene, one DNA strand functions as a template for transcription--the synthesis of a complementary mRNA molecule. The base-pairing rules for DNA synthesis also guide transcription, but uracil (U) takes the place of thymine (T) in RNA. During translation, the mRNA is read as a sequence of base triplets, called codons. Each codon specifies an amino acid to be added to the growing polypeptide chain. The mRNA is read in the 5&#39; 3&#39; direction.

An mRNA molecule is complementary rather than identical to its DNA template because RNA bases are assembled on the template according to base-pairing rules. The pairs are similar to those that form during DNA replication, except that U, the RNA substitute for T, pairs with A. Thus, when a DNA strand is transcribed, the base triplet ACC in DNA provides a template for UGG in the mRNA molecule. The mRNA base triplets are called codons. For example, UGG is the codon for the amino acid tryptophan (abbreviated Trp). (The term codon is also sometimes used for the complementary DNA base triplet. For example, the DNA codon corresponding to the RNA codon UGG is ACC.)

During translation, the sequence of codons along an mRNA molecule is decoded, or translated, into a sequence of amino acids making up a polypeptide chain. The codons are read in the 5&#39; 3&#39; direction along the mRNA. (To review what is meant by the 5&#39; and 3&#39; ends of a nucleic acid chain, see FIGURE 16.12.) Each codon specifies which one of the 20 amino acids will be incorporated at the corresponding position along a polypeptide. Because codons are base triplets, the number of nucleotides making up a genetic message must be three times the number of amino acids making up the protein product. For example, it takes 300 nucleotides along an RNA strand to code for a polypeptide that is 100 amino acids long.

Cracking the Genetic Code

Molecular biologists cracked the code of life in the early 1960s, when a series of elegant experiments disclosed the amino acid translations of each of the RNA codons. The first codon was deciphered in 1961 by Marshall Nirenberg, of the National Institutes of Health, and his colleagues. Nirenberg synthesized an artificial mRNA by linking identical RNA nucleotides containing uracil as their base. No matter where this message started or stopped, it could contain only one codon in repetition: UUU. Nirenberg added this "poly(U)" to a test-tube mixture containing amino acids, ribosomes, and the other components required for protein synthesis. His artificial system translated the poly(U) into a polypeptide containing a single amino acid, phenylalanine (Phe), strung together as a long polyphenylalanine chain. Thus, Nirenberg determined that the mRNA codon UUU specifies the amino acid phenylalanine. Soon, the amino acids specified by the codons AAA, GGG, and CCC were also determined.

Although more elaborate techniques were required to decode mixed triplets such as AUA and CGA, all 64 codons were deciphered by the mid-1960s. As FIGURE 17.4 shows, 61 of the 64 triplets code for amino acids. Notice that the codon AUG has a dual function: It not only codes for the amino acid methionine (Met), but also functions as a "start" signal, or initiation codon. Genetic messages begin with the mRNA codon AUG, which signals the protein-synthesizing machinery to begin translating the mRNA at that location. (Because AUG also stands for methionine, polypeptide chains begin with methionine when they are synthesized. However, an enzyme may subsequently remove this starter amino acid from a chain.) The remaining three codons do not designate amino acids. Instead, they are "stop" signals, or termination codons, marking the end of translation.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 17-4. The dictionary of the genetic code. The three bases of an mRNA codon are designated here as the first, second, and third bases, reading in the 5&#39; 3&#39; direction along the mRNA. (Practice using this dictionary by finding the codons in FIGURE 17.3.) The codon AUG not only stands for the amino acid methionine (Met) but also functions as a "start" signal for ribosomes to begin translating the mRNA at that point. Three of the 64 codons function as "stop" signals. Any one of these termination codons marks the end of a genetic message.

Notice in FIGURE 17.4 that there is redundancy in the genetic code, but no ambiguity. For example, although codons GAA and GAG both specify glutamic acid (redundancy), neither of them ever specifies any other amino acid (no ambiguity). The redundancy in the code is not altogether random. In many cases, codons that are synonyms for a particular amino acid differ only in the third base of the triplet. We will consider a possible benefit for this redundancy later in the chapter.

Our ability to extract the intended message from a written language depends on reading the symbols in the correct groupings--that is, in the correct reading frame. Consider this statement: "The red dog ate the cat." Group the letters incorrectly by starting at the wrong point, and the result will probably be gibberish: for example, "her edd oga tet hec at." The reading frame is also important in the molecular language of cells. The short stretch of polypeptide shown in FIGURE 17.3, for instance, will only be made correctly if the mRNA nucleotides are read from left to right (5&#39; 3&#39;) in the groups of three shown in the figure: UGG UUU GGC UCA. Although a genetic message is written with no spaces between the codons, the cell's protein-synthesizing machinery reads the message as a series of nonoverlapping three-letter words. The message is not read as a series of overlapping words--UGG UUU, and so on--which would convey a very different message.

Let's summarize what we have just covered. Genetic information is encoded as a sequence of nonoverlapping base triplets, or codons, each of which is translated into a specific amino acid during protein synthesis.




