
 Vertebrate nervous systems have central and peripheral components

All vertebrate nervous systems have some fundamental similarities, including distinct central and peripheral elements and a high degree of cephalization. In all vertebrates the brain and spinal cord make up the central nervous system (CNS), and the peripheral nervous system (PNS) is everything outside the CNS (FIGURE 48.16). The brain provides the integrative power that underlies the complex behavior of all vertebrates. The spinal cord, which runs lengthwise inside the vertebral column (spine), integrates simple responses to certain kinds of stimuli (such as the knee-jerk reflex) and conveys information to and from the brain. The vertebrate PNS transmits information to and from the CNS and regulates the internal environment of the organism.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-16. The nervous system of a vertebrate. The components of the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord) develop from the dorsal, hollow nerve cord, a hallmark of chordates. Cranial nerves (originating in the brain), spinal nerves (originating in the spinal cord), and ganglia outside the central nervous system make up the peripheral nervous system.

Neurons of the central nervous system surround a continuous system of fluid-filled cavities. The vertebrate CNS is derived from the dorsal hollow nerve cord of the embryo--one of the phylogenetic hallmarks of chordates (see Chapter 34). This development from a tube explains why both the brain and spinal cord contain fluid-filled spaces. The narrow central canal of the spinal cord is continuous with the fluid-filled spaces, called ventricles, of the brain. These cavities are filled with cerebrospinal fluid, which is formed in the brain by filtration of the blood. Circulating through the central canal and ventricles (and then draining back into the veins), the cerebrospinal fluid conveys nutrients, hormones, and white blood cells across the blood-brain barrier described earlier to different parts of the brain. Among the most important functions of cerebrospinal fluid is to act as a shock absorber, cushioning the brain. Also protecting the brain and spinal cord are layers of connective tissue, called meninges. In mammals, cerebrospinal fluid circulates between two of the meninges, providing an additional cushion for the brain.

Axons within the CNS are located in well-defined bundles, or tracts, whose myelin sheaths give them a whitish appearance. In cross sections of the brain and spinal cord, this white matter is clearly distinguishable from gray matter, which consists mainly of dendrites, unmyelinated axons, and clusters of nerve-cell bodies, or nuclei.




