
 The control of gene expression enables individual bacteria to adjust their metabolism to environmental change

Mutations and the various types of genetic transfer we have been studying generate the genetic variation that makes natural selection possible. And natural selection, acting over many generations, can increase the proportion of individuals in a bacterial population that are adapted to some new environmental condition. But how can an individual bacterium, locked into the genome it has inherited, cope with environmental fluctuation?

Think, for instance, of an E. coli cell living in the erratic environment of a human colon, dependent for its nutrients on the whimsical eating habits of its host. If the bacterium is deprived of the amino acid tryptophan, which it needs to survive, it responds by activating a metabolic pathway to make its own tryptophan from another compound. Later, if the human host eats a tryptophan-rich meal, the bacterial cell stops producing tryptophan for itself, thus saving the cell from squandering its resources to produce a substance that is available from the surrounding solution in prefabricated form. This is just one example of how bacteria tune their metabolism to changing environments.

Metabolic control occurs on two levels (FIGURE 18.19). First, cells can vary the numbers of specific enzyme molecules made; that is, they can regulate the expression of genes. Second, cells can adjust the activity of enzymes already present. The latter mode of control, which is more immediate, depends on the sensitivity of many enzymes to chemical cues that increase or decrease their catalytic activity (see Chapter 6). For example, activity of the first enzyme of the tryptophan synthesis pathway is inhibited by the pathway's end product. Thus, if tryptophan accumulates in a cell, it shuts down its own synthesis. Such feedback inhibition, typical of anabolic (biosynthetic) pathways, allows a cell to adapt to short-term fluctuations in levels of a substance it needs.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 18-19. Regulation of a metabolic pathway. In the pathway for tryptophan synthesis, an abundance of tryptophan can both (a) repress expression of the genes for all the enzymes needed for the pathway, and (b) inhibit the activity of the first enzyme in the pathway (feedback inhibition). The symbol  stands for "inhibition."

If, in our example, the environment continues to provide all the tryptophan the cell needs, the regulation of gene expression also comes into play: The cell stops making enzymes of the tryptophan pathway. This control of enzyme production occurs at the level of transcription, the synthesis of messenger RNA coding for these enzymes. More generally, many genes of the bacterial genome are switched on or off by changes in the metabolic status of the cell. The basic mechanism for this control of gene expression in bacteria, described as the operon model, was discovered in 1961 by Franois Jacob and Jacques Monod at the Pasteur Institute in Paris. Let's see what an operon is and how it works, using the control of tryptophan synthesis as our first example.

Operons: The Basic Concept

E. coli synthesizes tryptophan from a precursor molecule in a series of steps, each reaction catalyzed by a specific enzyme (see FIGURE 18.19). The five genes coding for the polypeptide chains that make up these enzymes are clustered together on the bacterial chromosome. A single promoter serves all five genes, which constitute a transcription unit. (Recall from Chapter 17 that a promoter is a site where RNA polymerase can bind to DNA and begin transcribing genes.) Thus, transcription gives rise to one long mRNA molecule representing all five genes for the tryptophan pathway. The cell can translate this transcript into separate polypeptides because the mRNA is punctuated with start and stop codons signaling where the coding sequence for each polypeptide begins and ends.

A key advantage of grouping genes of related function into one transcription unit is that a single "on-off switch" can control the whole cluster of functionally related genes. When an E. coli cell must make tryptophan for itself because the nutrient medium lacks this amino acid, all the enzymes for the metabolic pathway are synthesized at one time. The switch is a segment of DNA called an operator. Both its location and name suit its function: Positioned within the promoter or between the promoter and the enzyme-coding genes, the operator controls the access of RNA polymerase to the genes. All together, the operator, the promoter, and the genes they control--the entire stretch of DNA required for enzyme production for the tryptophan pathway--is called an operon (FIGURE 18.20). Here we are dissecting one of many operons that have been discovered in E. coli: the trp operon (trp for tryptophan).

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 18-20. The trp operon: regulated synthesis of repressible enzymes. Tryptophan is an amino acid produced by an anabolic path-way catalyzed by repressible enzymes. Five genes encoding the polypeptides that make up the enzymes of this pathway are grouped into an operon, along with a promoter and an operator. (The trp operator is located within the trp promoter.) Accumulation of tryptophan, the end product of the pathway, represses synthesis of the enzymes. The mechanism in E. coli is shown here.

If the operator is the control point for transcription, what determines whether the operator is in the on or off mode? By itself, the operator is on; RNA polymerase can bind to the promoter and transcribe the genes of the operon. The operon can be switched off by a protein called the repressor. The repressor binds to the operator and blocks attachment of RNA polymerase to the promoter, preventing transcription of the genes. Repressor proteins are specific; that is, they recognize and bind only to the operator of a certain operon. The repressor that switches off the trp operon has no effect on other operons in the E. coli genome.

The repressor is the product of a gene called a regulatory gene. The regulatory gene encoding the trp repressor, trpR, is located some distance away from the operon it controls and has its own promoter. Transcription of trpR produces an mRNA molecule that is translated into the repressor protein, which can then reach the operator of the trp operon by diffusion. Regulatory genes are transcribed continuously, although at a low rate, and a few trp repressor molecules are always present in the cell. Why, then, is the trp operon not switched off permanently? First, the binding of repressors to operators is reversible. An operator vacillates between the on and off modes, with the relative duration of each state depending on the number of active repressor molecules around. Secondly, the trp repressor, like most regulatory proteins, is an allosteric protein, with two alternative shapes, active and inactive (see FIGURE 6.18). The trp repressor is synthesized in an inactive form with little affinity for the trp operator. Only if tryptophan binds to the repressor at an allosteric site does the repressor protein change to the active form that can attach to the operator, turning the operon off.

Tryptophan functions in this system as a corepressor, a small molecule that cooperates with a repressor protein to switch an operon off. As tryptophan accumulates, more tryptophan molecules associate with trp repressor molecules, which can then bind to the trp operator and shut down tryptophan production. If the cell's tryptophan level drops, transcription of the operon's genes resumes. This is one example of how gene expression responds rapidly to changes in the cell's internal and external environment.

Repressible Versus Inducible Operons: Two Types of Negative Gene Regulation

The trp operon is said to be a repressible operon because its transcription is inhibited when a specific small molecule (tryptophan) binds allosterically to a regulatory protein. In contrast, an inducible operon is stimulated (that is, induced) when a specific small molecule interacts with a regulatory protein. Let's investigate an example, which was actually the operon first worked out by Jacob and Monod (FIGURE 18.21).

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 18-21. The lac operon: regulated synthesis of inducible enzymes. E. coli uses three enzymes to take up and metabolize lactose. The genes for these three enzymes are clustered in the lac operon. One gene, lacZ, codes for b-galactosidase, which hydrolyzes lactose to glucose and galactose. The second gene, lacY, codes for a permease, the membrane protein that transports lactose into the cell. The third gene, lacA, codes for an enzyme called transacetylase, whose function in lactose metabolism is still unclear. The gene for the lac repressor, lacI, happens to be adjacent to the lac operon, an unusual situation. (The function of the upstream (left) end of the promoter is revealed in FIGURE 18.22.)

The disaccharide lactose (milk sugar) is available to E. coli if the human host drinks milk. The bacteria can absorb the lactose and break it down for energy or use it as a source of organic carbon for synthesizing other compounds. Lactose metabolism begins with hydrolysis of the disaccharide into its two component monosaccharides, glucose and galactose. The enzyme that catalyzes this reaction is called b-galactosidase. Only a few molecules of this enzyme are present in an E. coli cell that has been growing in the absence of lactose--in the intestines of a person who does not drink milk, for example. But if lactose is added to the bacterium's nutrient medium, it takes only about 15 minutes for the number of b-galactosidase molecules in the cell to increase a thousandfold.

The gene for b-galactosidase is part of an operon, the lac operon (lac for lactose metabolism), that includes two other genes coding for proteins that function in lactose metabolism (see FIGURE 18.21). This entire transcription unit is under the command of a single operator and promoter. The regulatory gene, lacI, located outside the operon, codes for an allosteric repressor protein that can switch off the lac operon by binding to the operator. So far, this sounds just like regulation of the trp operon, but there is one important difference. Recall that the trp repressor was innately inactive and required tryptophan as a corepressor in order to bind to the operator. The lac repressor, in contrast, is active all by itself, binding to the operator and switching the lac operon off. In this case, a specific small molecule, called an inducer, inactivates the repressor. For the lac operon, the inducer is allolactose, an isomer of lactose formed in small amounts from lactose that enters the cell. In the absence of lactose (and hence allolactose), the lac repressor is in its active configuration, and the genes of the lac operon are silenced. If lactose is added to the cell's nutrient medium, allolactose binds to the lac repressor and alters its conformation, nullifying the repressor's ability to attach to the operator. Now, on demand, the lac operon produces mRNA for the enzymes of the lactose pathway. In the context of gene regulation, these enzymes are referred to as inducible enzymes, because their synthesis is induced by a chemical signal (allolactose, in this case). Analogously, the enzymes for tryptophan synthesis are said to be repressible.

Let's compare repressible enzymes and inducible enzymes in terms of the metabolic economy of the E. coli cell. Repressible enzymes generally function in anabolic pathways, which synthesize essential end products from raw materials (precursors). By suspending production of an end product when it is already present in sufficient quantity, the cell can allocate its organic precursors and energy for other uses. In contrast, inducible enzymes usually function in catabolic pathways, which break a nutrient down to simpler molecules. By producing the appropriate enzymes only when the nutrient is available, the cell avoids making proteins that have nothing to do. Why bother, for example, to make the enzymes that break down milk sugar when no milk is present?

In comparing repressible and inducible enzymes, there is one more important point: Both systems are examples of the negative control of genes, because the operons are switched off by the active form of the repressor protein. It may be easier to see this in the case of the trp operon, but it is true for the lac operon as well. Allolactose induces enzyme synthesis not by acting directly on the genome, but by freeing the lac operon from the negative effect of the repressor. Technically, allolactose is more of a derepressor than an inducer of genes. Gene regulation is said to be positive only when an activator molecule interacts directly with the genome to switch transcription on. Let's look at an example, again involving the lac operon.

An Example of Positive Gene Regulation

For the enzymes that break down lactose to be synthesized in appreciable quantity, it is not enough that lactose be present in the bacterial cell. The other requirement is that the simple sugar glucose be in short supply. Given a choice of substrates for glycolysis and other catabolic pathways, E. coli preferentially uses glucose, the sugar most reliably present in its environment. The enzymes for glucose breakdown (glycolysis; see FIGURE 9.9) are continually present.

How does the E. coli cell sense the glucose concentration, and how is this information relayed to the genome? Again, the mechanism depends on the interaction of an allosteric regulatory protein with a small organic molecule. The small molecule is cyclic AMP (cAMP), which accumulates when glucose is scarce (see FIGURE 11.12 for the structure of cAMP). The regulatory protein is cAMP receptor protein (CRP), and it is an activator of transcription. When cAMP binds to the allosteric site on CRP, the protein assumes its active shape and can bind to a specific site at the upstream end of the lac promoter (FIGURE 18.22). The attachment of CRP actually bends the DNA, which somehow makes it easier for RNA polymerase to bind to the promoter and start transcription of the operon. Because CRP is a regulatory protein that directly stimulates gene expression, this mechanism qualifies as positive regulation.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 18-22. Positive control: cAMP receptor protein. RNA polymerase has a low affinity for the promoter of the lac operon unless helped by a regulatory protein called the cAMP receptor protein (CRP), which binds to a DNA site at the upstream end of the promoter. The CRP molecule can attach to the DNA only when associated with cyclic AMP (cAMP), whose concentration in the cell rises when the glucose concentration falls. Thus, even if lactose is available, the cell preferentially catabolizes glucose, using enzymes that are always present. This regulatory system ensures that E. coli will gear up for consumption of lactose and other secondary catabolites only when glucose is scarce.

If the amount of glucose in the cell increases, the cAMP concentration falls, and without it, CRP disengages from the operon. Because CRP is inactive, transcription of the lac operon proceeds at only a low level, even in the presence of lactose. Thus, the lac operon is under dual control: negative control by the lac repressor and positive control by CRP. The state of the lac repressor (with or without allolactose) determines whether or not transcription of the lac operon's genes can occur; the state of CRP (with or without cAMP) controls the rate of transcription if the operon is repressor-free. It is as though the operon has both an on-off switch and a volume control.

Although we have used the lac operon as an example, CRP, unlike repressor proteins, works on several different operons that encode enzymes used in catabolic pathways. When glucose is present and CRP is inactive, there is a general slowdown in the synthesis of enzymes required for the catabolism of compounds other than glucose. The cell's ability to catabolize other compounds, such as lactose, provides backup systems that enable a cell deprived of glucose to survive. The specific compounds present at the moment determine which operons are switched on. These elaborate contingency mechanisms suit an organism that cannot control what its host eats. Bacteria are remarkable in their ability to adapt--over the long term by evolutionary changes in their genetic makeup and over the short term by the control of gene expression in individual cells. Of course, the various control mechanisms are also evolutionary products that exist because they have been favored by natural selection.

Molecular genetics was founded on the study of viruses and bacteria, the microbial models that have been the subjects of this chapter. Eukaryotic organisms and their genomes are much more complex, and only in the past decade or so have researchers begun to learn how the control of gene expression helps bring about this complexity. In the next chapter, we begin to explore this topic.




