
 Organisms are open systems that interact continuously with their environments

Life does not exist in a vacuum. An organism is an example of what scientists call an open system, an entity that exchanges materials and energy with its surroundings. Each organism interacts continuously with its environment, which includes other organisms as well as nonliving factors. The roots of a tree, for example, absorb water and minerals from the soil, and the leaves take in carbon dioxide from the air. Solar energy absorbed by chlorophyll, the green pigment of leaves, drives photosynthesis, which converts water and carbon dioxide to sugar and oxygen. The tree releases oxygen to the air, and its roots change the soil by breaking up rocks into smaller particles, secreting acid, and absorbing minerals. Both organism and environment are affected by the interaction between them. The tree also interacts with other life, including soil microorganisms associated with its roots and animals that eat its leaves and fruit.

Ecosystem Dynamics

The many interactions between organisms and their environment are interwoven to form the fabric of an ecosystem. The dynamics of any ecosystem include two major processes. One is the cycling of nutrients. For example, minerals acquired by plants will eventually be returned to the soil by microorganisms that decompose leaf litter, dead roots, and other organic debris. The second major process in an ecosystem is the flow of energy from sunlight to photosynthetic life (producers) to organisms that feed on plants (consumers) (FIGURE 1.7).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 1-7. An introduction to energy flow and energy transformation in an ecosystem. Living is work, and work requires that organisms obtain and use energy. Most ecosystems are solar powered. Plants and other photosynthetic organisms convert light energy to the chemical energy stored in sugar and other complex molecules. By breaking these fuel molecules down to simpler molecules, organisms can harvest the stored energy and put it to work. Animals and other consumers acquire their energy in chemical form by eating plants, by eating animals that ate plants, or by decomposing organic refuse, such as leaf litter and dead animals. The energy that enters an ecosystem in the form of sunlight exits in the form of heat, which all organisms dissipate to their surroundings.

Energy Conversion

The exchange of energy between an organism and its surroundings involves the transformation of one form of energy to another. For example, when a leaf produces sugar, it converts solar energy to chemical energy in sugar molecules. When an animal's muscle cells use sugar as fuel to power movements, they convert chemical energy into kinetic energy, the energy of motion. All of the work of cells involves the transformation of chemical energy (which is ordered) into heat, which is the unordered energy of random molecular motion. Life requires the continual uptake of ordered energy and the release of some unordered energy to the surroundings.




