
 Structural adaptations of digestive systems are often associated with diet

The digestive systems of mammals and other vertebrates are variations on a common plan, but there are many intriguing adaptations, often associated with the animal's diet. We will examine just a few.

Dentition, an animal's assortment of teeth, is one example of structural variation reflecting diet. Particularly in mammals, evolutionary adaptation of teeth for processing different kinds of food is one of the major reasons this vertebrate class has been so successful. Compare the dentition of carnivorous, herbivorous, and omnivorous mammals in FIGURE 41.20. Nonmammalian vertebrates generally have less specialized dentition, but there are interesting exceptions. For example, poisonous snakes, such as rattlesnakes, have fangs, modified teeth that inject venom into prey. Some fangs are hollow, like syringes, while others drip the poison along grooves on the surfaces of the teeth. All snakes have another important anatomical adaptation associated with feeding: They swallow their prey whole, with no chewing, and the lower jaw is loosely hinged to the skull by an elastic ligament that permits the mouth and throat to open very wide for swallowing impressively large prey (once again, witness the astonishing episode recorded in FIGURE 41.9). Large, expandable stomachs are common in carnivores, which may go for a long time between meals and therefore must eat as much as they can when they do catch prey. For example, a 200-kg African lion can consume 40 kg of meat in one meal.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 41-20. Dentition and diet. (a) Carnivores, such as members of the dog and cat families, generally have pointed incisors and canines that can be used to kill prey and rip or cut away pieces of flesh. The jagged premolars and molars crush and shred food. (b) In contrast, herbivorous mammals, such as cows, usually have teeth with broad, ridged surfaces that grind tough plant material. The incisors and canines are generally modified for biting off pieces of vegetation. (c) Humans, being omnivores adapted for eating both vegetation and meat, have a relatively unspecialized dentition. The permanent (adult) set of teeth is 32 in number. Beginning at the midline of the upper and lower jaw are two blade-like incisors for biting, a pointed canine for tearing, two premolars for grinding, and three molars for crushing.

The length of the vertebrate digestive system is also correlated with diet. In general, herbivores and omnivores have longer alimentary canals relative to their body size than carnivores (FIGURE 41.21). Vegetation is more difficult to digest than meat because it contains cell walls. A longer tract furnishes more time for digestion and more surface area for the absorption of nutrients.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 41-21. The digestive tracts of a carnivore (coyote) and a herbivore (koala) compared. Although these two mammals are about the same size, the koala's intestines are much longer, an adaptation that enhances processing of fibrous, protein-poor eucalyptus leaves from which it obtains virtually all its food and water. Extensive chewing chops the leaves into very small pieces, increasing exposure of the food to di-gestive juices. The koala's cecum--at 2 m, the longest of any animal of equivalent size--functions as a fermentation chamber where symbiotic bacteria convert the shredded leaves into a more nutritious diet.




