
 Acid precipitation threatens the fitness of the environment

Considering the dependence of all life on water, contamination of rivers, lakes, and seas is a dire environmental problem. One of the most serious assaults on water quality is acid precipitation.

Uncontaminated rain has a pH of about 5.6, slightly acidic, owing to the formation of carbonic acid from carbon dioxide and water. Acid precipitation refers to rain, snow, or fog that is more acidic than pH 5.6. What causes acid precipitation, and what are its effects on the fitness of the environment?

Acid precipitation is caused primarily by the presence in the atmosphere of sulfur oxides and nitrogen oxides, gaseous compounds that react with water in the air to form strong acids, which fall to earth with rain or snow. A major source of these oxides is the burning of fossil fuels (coal, oil, and gas) in factories and automobiles. Electrical power plants that burn coal produce more of these pollutants than any other single source. Ironically, the tall smokestacks built to reduce local pollution by dispersing factory exhaust help spread airborne pollutants. Winds carry the pollutants away, and acid rain may fall thousands of miles away from industrial centers. In the Adirondack Mountains of upstate New York, the pH of rainfall averages 4.2, about 25 times more acidic than normal rain. Acid precipitation falls on many other regions, including the Cascade Mountains of the Pacific Northwest and certain parts of Europe and Asia. One West Virginia storm dropped rain having a pH of 1.5, as acidic as the digestive juices in our stomachs!

The effect of acids in lakes and streams is most pronounced in the spring, as snow begins to melt. The surface snow melts first, drains down, and sends much of the acid that has accumulated over the winter into lakes and streams all at once. Early meltwater often has a pH as low as 3, and this acid surge hits when fish and other forms of aquatic life are producing eggs and young, which are especially vulnerable to acidic conditions. Strong acidity can alter the structure of biological molecules and prevent them from carrying out the essential chemical processes of life.

Although acid precipitation can clearly damage life in lakes and streams, its direct effects on forests and other terrestrial life are controversial. However, recent research indicates that acid rain and snow can bring about profound changes in soils by affecting the solubility of soil minerals. Acid precipitation falling on land washes away certain mineral ions, such as calcium and magnesium ions, that ordinarily help buffer the soil solution and are essential nutrients for plant growth. At the same time, other minerals, such as aluminum, reach toxic concentrations when acidification increases their solubility. The effects of acid precipitation on soil chemistry have contributed to the decline of European forests and are taking a toll on some North American forests (FIGURE 3.10). Nevertheless, studies indicate that the majority of North American forests are not currently suffering substantially from acid precipitation.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 3-10. The effects of acid precipitation on a forest. Acid fog and acid rain are thought to be responsible for directly or indirectly killing many of the trees on Mount Mitchell, in North Carolina.

If there is reason for optimism about the future quality of water resources, it is our progress in reducing certain kinds of pollution. For example, in the United States, Canada, and Europe, emissions of sulfur oxides have declined markedly in recent decades, causing a decrease in acid precipitation. Continued progress can come only from the actions of people who are concerned about environmental quality. An essential part of their education is to understand the crucial role that water plays in the environment's fitness for continued life on Earth.




