
 Neolithic humans created new plant varieties by artificial selection

Humans have intervened in the reproduction and genetic makeup of plants for thousands of years. It is no exaggeration to say that maize is an unnatural monster created by humans. Left on its own in nature, maize would soon become extinct for the simple reason that it cannot spread its seeds. Maize kernels not only are permanently attached to the central axis (the "cob") but also are permanently protected by tough, overlapping leaf sheathes (the "husk"). Obviously, these attributes, so useful to people, arose not by natural selection but by artificial selection by humans (FIGURE 38.19). (See Chapter 22 to review the basic concept of artificial selection.) Indeed, Neolithic (late Stone Age) humans domesticated virtually all of our crop species over a relatively short period about 10,000 years ago. But genetic modification began long before humans started altering crops by artificial selection. For example, the wheat groups we rely on for much of our food supply are the result of natural hybridization between different species of grasses. Such hybridization is common in plants, and has long been exploited by plant breeders to introduce additional genetic variation for artificial selection and crop improvement. Let's consider one modern example, the selective breeding of maize.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 38-19. Maize: a product of artificial selection. Modern maize (bottom) was derived from teosinte (top). Teosinte kernels are tiny, and each one has a husk that must be removed to get at the kernel. The cob shatters during seed dispersal, which probably made harvesting difficult for early farmers. Neolithic farmers selected for larger cob and kernel size as well as the permanent attachment of seeds to the cob and the encasing of the entire cob by a tough husk.

Maize is a major staple in many developing countries. Nevertheless, the most common varieties are relatively poor sources of protein, thus requiring that diets be supplemented with other protein sources such as beans. The proteins that are stored in these popular maize varieties are very low in lysine and tryptophan, two of the eight essential amino acids that humans cannot synthesize and must obtain from their diet (see FIGURE 41.4). Forty years ago, researchers discovered a mutant maize known as opaque-2 that had much higher levels of lysine and tryptophan. But, as is often the case in plant breeding, a highly desirable trait turned out to be closely associated with several undesirable ones. The opaque-2 maize kernels have a soft endosperm that makes them difficult to harvest and more vulnerable to attack by pests. But, of course, this maize variety is more nutritious. Swine fed with opaque-2 maize gain weight three times faster than those fed with normal maize. Using the conventional breeding methods of hybridization and artificial selection, plant breeders were able to convert the original soft opaque-2 endosperm into a more desirable hard endosperm type. This transition took nearly 20 years. Had modern methods of genetic engineering been available then, the genes responsible for the high lysine and tryptophan condition could have been inserted directly into hard-endosperm maize varieties.

Unlike traditional plant breeders, modern plant biotechnologists, using the techniques of genetic engineering, are not limited solely to the transfer of genes between closely related species or varieties of the same species. For example, traditional plant breeding techniques could not be used to insert a desired gene from daffodil into rice, but genetic engineering makes this possible. The term transgenic is used to describe organisms that have been genetically engineered to express a foreign gene from another species. The reason that traditional plant breeders cannot introduce daffodil genes into rice is that the many intermediate species between rice and daffodil and their common ancestor are extinct. In theory, if plant breeders did have the intermediate species at their disposal, they could, probably over the course of several centuries, introduce a daffodil gene into rice by traditional hybridization and breeding methods. With genetic engineering technology, this gene transfer can be accomplished without the need for intermediate species.




