
 Transcription is the DNA-directed synthesis of RNA: a closer look

Messenger RNA, the carrier of information from DNA to the cell's protein-synthesizing machinery, is transcribed from the template strand of a gene. An enzyme called an RNA polymerase pries the two strands of DNA apart and hooks together the RNA nucleotides as they base-pair along the DNA template (FIGURE 17.6). Like the DNA polymerases that function in DNA replication, RNA polymerases can add nucleotides only to the 3&#39; end of the growing polymer. Thus, an RNA molecule elongates in its 5&#39; 3&#39; direction.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 17-6. The stages of transcription: initiation, elongation, and termination. RNA polymerase moves along a gene from the promoter (green) to just beyond the terminator (red), assembling an RNA molecule (transcript) complementary to the gene's template strand. In a prokaryote, the RNA transcript of a protein-coding gene is immediately usable as mRNA; in a eukaryote, it must first undergo processing, as described on pp. 311-312.

Specific sequences of nucleotides along the DNA mark where transcription of a gene begins and ends. The DNA sequence where RNA polymerase attaches and initiates transcription is known as the promoter; the sequence that signals the end of transcription is called the terminator. Molecular biologists refer to the direction of transcription as "downstream" and the other direction as "upstream." These terms are also used to describe the positions of nucleotide sequences within the DNA or RNA. Thus, the promoter sequence in DNA is said to be upstream from the terminator. The stretch of DNA that is transcribed into an RNA molecule is called a transcription unit.

Bacteria have a single type of RNA polymerase that synthesizes not only mRNA but also other types of RNA that function in protein synthesis. In contrast, eukaryotes have three types of RNA polymerase in their nuclei, numbered I, II, and III. The one used for mRNA synthesis is RNA polymerase II. In the discussion of transcription that follows, we start with the features of mRNA synthesis common to both prokaryotes and eukaryotes and then describe some key differences.

The three stages of transcription, as shown in FIGURE 17.6 and described next, are initiation, elongation, and termination of the RNA chain. Study FIGURE 17.6 to familiarize yourself with the stages of transcription and the terms used to describe them.

RNA Polymerase Binding and Initiation of Transcription

The promoter of a gene includes within it the transcription start point (the nucleotide where RNA synthesis actually begins) and typically extends several dozen nucleotide pairs "upstream" from the start point. In addition to serving as a binding site for RNA polymerase and determining where transcription starts, the promoter determines which of the two strands of the DNA helix is used as the template.

Certain sections of a promoter are especially important for binding RNA polymerase. In prokaryotes, the RNA polymerase itself specifically recognizes and binds to the promoter. In eukaryotes, a collection of proteins called transcription factors mediate the binding of RNA polymerase and the initiation of transcription. Only after certain transcription factors are attached to the promoter does the RNA polymerase bind to it. The completed assembly of transcription factors and RNA polymerase bound to the promoter is called a transcription initiation complex. FIGURE 17.7 shows the role of transcription factors and a crucial promoter DNA sequence called a TATA box in forming the initiation complex.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 17-7. The initiation of transcription at a eukaryotic promoter. In eukaryotic cells, proteins called transcription factors mediate the initiation of transcription by RNA polymerase. The enzyme that transcribes protein-coding genes in eukaryotic cells is called RNA polymerase II.

The interaction between eukaryotic RNA polymerase and transcription factors is an example of the special importance of protein-protein interactions in controlling eukaryotic transcription (as we will discuss further in Chapter 19). Once the polymerase is firmly attached to the promoter DNA, the two DNA strands unwind there, and the enzyme starts transcribing the template strand.

Elongation of the RNA Strand

As RNA polymerase moves along the DNA, it continues to untwist the double helix, exposing about 10 to 20 DNA bases at a time for pairing with RNA nucleotides (see FIGURE 17.6). The enzyme adds nucleotides to the 3&#39; end of the growing RNA molecule as it continues along the double helix. In the wake of this advancing wave of RNA synthesis, the DNA double helix re-forms and the new RNA molecule peels away from its DNA template. Transcription progresses at a rate of about 60 nucleotides per second in eukaryotes.

A single gene can be transcribed simultaneously by several molecules of RNA polymerase following each other like trucks in a convoy. A growing strand of RNA trails off from each polymerase, with the length of each new strand reflecting how far along the template the enzyme has traveled from the start point (see FIGURE 17.22). The congregation of many polymerase molecules simultaneously transcribing a single gene increases the amount of mRNA transcribed from it, which helps the cell make the encoded protein in large amounts.

Termination of Transcription

Transcription proceeds until after the RNA polymerase transcribes a terminator sequence in the DNA. The transcribed terminator--an RNA sequence--functions as the actual termination signal. There are several different mechanisms of transcription termination, the details of which are still somewhat murky. In the prokaryotic cell, transcription usually stops right at the end of the termination signal; when the polymerase reaches that point, it releases both the RNA and the DNA. By contrast, in the eukaryotic cell, the polymerase continues for hundreds of nucleotides past the termination signal, which is an AAUAAA sequence in the pre-mRNA (see FIGURE 17.8). But then, at a point about 10 to 35 nucleotides past the AAUAAA, the pre-mRNA is cut free from the enzyme. The cleavage site on the RNA is also the site for the addition of a poly(A) tail--one step of RNA processing, our next topic.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 17-8. RNA processing: addition of the 5&#39; cap and poly(A) tail. Enzymes modify the two ends of a eukaryotic pre-mRNA molecule. The modified ends help protect the RNA from degradation, and the poly(A) tail may promote the export of mRNA from the nucleus. When the mRNA reaches the cytoplasm, the modified ends, in conjunction with certain cytoplasmic proteins, facilitate ribosome attachment. The leader and trailer are not translated, nor is the poly(A) tail.




