
 Natural selection cannot fashion perfect organisms

There are at least four reasons why natural selection cannot produce perfection.

Evolution is limited by historical constraints. Each species has a legacy of descent with modification from a long line of ancestral forms. Evolution does not scrap ancestral anatomy and build each new complex structure from scratch, but coopts existing structures and adapts them to new situations. For example, the excruciating back problems some humans endure result in part because the skeleton and musculature modified from the anatomy of four-legged ancestors are not fully compatible with upright posture.

Adaptations are often compromises. Each organism must do many different things. A seal spends part of its time on rocks; it could probably walk better if it had legs instead of flippers, but it would not swim nearly as well. We humans owe much of our versatility and athleticism to our prehensile hands and flexible limbs, which also make us prone to sprains, torn ligaments, and dislocations; structural reinforcement has been compromised for agility.

Not all evolution is adaptive. Chance probably affects the genetic structure of populations to a greater extent than was once believed. For instance, when a storm blows insects hundreds of miles over an ocean to an island, the wind does not necessarily transport the specimens that are best suited to the new environment. Thus, not all alleles fixed by genetic drift in the gene pool of the small founding population are better suited to the environment than alleles that are lost.

Selection can only edit existing variations. Natural selection favors only the fittest variations from the phenotypes that are available, which may not be the ideal traits. New alleles do not arise on demand.

With all these constraints, we cannot expect evolution to craft perfect organisms. Natural selection operates on a "better than" basis. We can see evidence for evolution in the subtle imperfections of the organisms it produces.




