
 Tracheal systems and lungs are respiratory adaptations of terrestrial animals

As a respiratory medium, air has many advantages over water, including a much higher concentration of oxygen (about 210 mL O2 per liter of air). Also, since O2 and CO2 diffuse much faster in air than in water, respiratory surfaces exposed to air do not have to be ventilated as thoroughly as gills. As the respiratory surface removes O2 from the air and expels CO2, diffusion rapidly brings more oxygen to the respiratory surface and carries the CO2 away. When a terrestrial animal does ventilate, less energy is needed because air is far lighter and much easier to pump than water and because much less volume needs to be breathed to obtain an equal amount of O2. But along with these advantages comes a problem: The respiratory surface, which must be large and moist, continuously loses water to the air by evaporation. The problem is greatly reduced by a respiratory surface folded into the body.

Tracheal Systems

The tracheal system of insects, made up of air tubes that branch throughout the body, is one variation on the theme of a folded internal respiratory surface. The largest tubes, called tracheae, open to the outside. The finest branches extend to the surface of nearly every cell, where gas is exchanged by diffusion across the moist epithelium that lines the terminal ends of the tracheal system (FIGURE 42.22). With virtually all body cells within a very short distance of the respiratory medium, the open circulatory system of insects is not involved in transporting oxygen and carbon dioxide.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-22. Tracheal systems. (a) The respiratory system of an insect consists of branched internal tubes that deliver air directly to body cells. Rings of chitin reinforce the largest tubes, called tracheae, keeping them from collapsing. Enlarged portions of tracheae form air sacs near organs that require a large supply of oxygen. Air enters the tracheae through openings called spiracles on the insect's body surface and passes into smaller tubes called tracheoles. The tracheoles terminate on the plasma membranes of individual cells. The tiny tips of the tracheoles are closed and contain fluid (dark blue). When the animal is active and is using more O2, most of the fluid is withdrawn into the body. This increases the surface area of air in contact with cells. (b) This micrograph shows cross sections of tracheoles in a tiny piece of insect flight muscle (TEM). Each of the numerous mitochondria in the muscle cells lies within about 5 mm of one or more tracheoles.

For a small insect, diffusion through the trachea brings in enough O2 and removes enough CO2 to support cellular respiration. Larger insects with higher energy demands ventilate their tracheal systems with rhythmic body movements that compress and expand the air tubes like bellows. An insect in flight has a very high metabolic rate, consuming 10 to 200 times more O2 than it does at rest. In many flying insects, alternating contraction and relaxation of the flight muscles compress and expand the body, rapidly pumping air through the tracheal system. The flight muscle cells are packed with mitochondria that support the high metabolic rate, and the tracheal tubes supply each of these ATP-generating organelles with ample oxygen (FIGURE 42.22b). Thus, we see a direct relationship between adaptations of tracheal systems and the theme of bioenergetics.

Lungs

Unlike tracheal systems that branch throughout the insect body, lungs are restricted to one location. Because the respiratory surface of a lung is not in direct contact with all other parts of the body, the gap must be bridged by the circulatory system, which transports gases between the lungs and the rest of the body. Lungs have a dense net of capillaries just under the epithelium that forms the respiratory surface. Lungs have evolved in spiders, terrestrial snails, and vertebrates.

Among the vertebrates, amphibians have relatively small lungs that do not provide a large surface (many lack lungs altogether), and rely heavily on diffusion across other body surfaces for gas exchange. The skin of frogs, for example, supplements gas exchange in the lungs. In contrast, most reptiles and all birds and mammals rely entirely on lungs for gas exchange. Turtles are an exception; they supplement lung breathing with gas exchange across moist epithelial surfaces in their mouth and anus. Lungs and air-breathing have evolved in a few fish species (lungfishes) as adaptations to living in oxygen-poor water or to spending part of their time exposed to air (for example, when the water level of a pond recedes).

In general, the size and complexity of lungs are correlated with an animal's metabolic rate (and hence rate of gas exchange). For example, the lungs of endotherms have a greater area of exchange surface than the lungs of similar-sized ectotherms.

Mammalian Respiratory Systems: A Closer Look

Located in the thoracic (chest) cavity, the lungs of mammals have a spongy texture and are honeycombed with a moist epithelium that functions as the respiratory surface. A system of branching ducts conveys air to the lungs (FIGURE 42.23). Air enters through the nostrils and is then filtered by hairs, warmed, humidified, and sampled for odors as it flows through a maze of spaces in the nasal cavity. The nasal cavity leads to the pharynx, an intersection where the paths for air and food cross. When food is swallowed, the larynx (the upper part of the respiratory tract) moves upward and tips the epiglottis over the glottis (the opening of the windpipe). This allows food to go down the esophagus to the stomach (see FIGURE 41.14). The rest of the time, the glottis is open, and we can breathe.

a.

c.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-23. The mammalian respiratory system. (a) From the nasal cavity and pharynx, inhaled air passes through the larynx and down the trachea and bronchi to the tiniest bronchioles, which end in lobed, microscopic air sacs called alveoli. (b) A thin, moist epithelium lining the inner surfaces of the alveoli is the respiratory surface. Branches of the pulmonary artery (see FIGURE 42.4) convey oxygen-poor blood to the alveoli, while branches of the pulmonary vein transport oxygen-rich blood from the alveoli back to the heart. (c) The left micrograph (SEM) shows the dense capillary bed that envelops the alveoli. The right micrograph (colorized SEM) is a cutaway view of alveoli, showing the air spaces.

The wall of the larynx is reinforced with cartilage. In most mammals, the larynx is adapted as a voicebox. When air is exhaled, it rushes by a pair of vocal cords in the larynx, and sounds are produced when voluntary muscles in the voicebox are tensed, stretching the cords so they vibrate. High-pitched sounds result when the cords are stretched tight and vibrate rapidly; low-pitched sounds come from less tense cords vibrating slowly.

From the larynx, air passes into the trachea, or windpipe. Rings of cartilage (actually shaped like the letter C) maintain the shape of the trachea. The trachea forks into two bronchi (singular, bronchus), one leading to each lung. Within the lung, the bronchus branches repeatedly into finer and finer tubes called bronchioles. The entire system of air ducts has the appearance of an inverted tree, the trunk being the trachea. The epithelium lining the major branches of this respiratory tree is covered by cilia and a thin film of mucus. The mucus traps dust, pollen, and other particulate contaminants, and the beating cilia move the mucus upward to the pharynx, where it can be swallowed into the esophagus. This process helps cleanse the respiratory system.

At their tips, the tiniest bronchioles dead-end as a cluster of air sacs called alveoli (singular, alveolus; FIGURE 42.23b). Gas exchange occurs across the thin epithelium of the lung's millions of alveoli, which have a total surface area of about 100 m2 in humans, sufficient to carry out gas exchange for the entire body. Oxygen in the air entering the alveoli dissolves in the moist film and rapidly diffuses across the epithelium into a web of capillaries that surrounds each alveolus. Carbon dioxide diffuses in the opposite direction, from the capillaries across the epithelium of the alveolus, and into the air space (FIGURE 42.23c).

Ventilating the Lungs

Like fish, terrestrial vertebrates rely on ventilation to maintain high oxygen and low carbon dioxide concentrations at the gas exchange surface. The process that ventilates lungs is breathing, the alternate inhalation and exhalation of air.

A frog ventilates its lungs by positive pressure breathing. During a breathing cycle, muscles lower the floor of the oral cavity, enlarging it and drawing in air through the nostrils. Then, with the nostrils and mouth closed, the floor of the oral cavity rises and air is forced down the trachea. Elastic recoil of the lungs, together with compression by the muscular body wall, forces air back out of the lungs during exhalation.

In contrast to how a frog breathes, mammals ventilate their lungs by negative pressure breathing, which works like a suction pump, pulling air instead of pushing it into the lungs (FIGURE 42.24). Muscle action changes the volume of the rib cage and the chest cavity, and the lungs follow suit. This occurs because the lungs are enclosed by a double-walled sac. The inner layer of the sac adheres to the outside of the lungs, and the outer layer adheres to the wall of the chest cavity. A thin space filled with fluid separates the two layers. Because of surface tension, the two layers behave like two plates of glass stuck together by a film of water. The layers can slide smoothly past each other, but they cannot be pulled apart easily. Surface tension couples movement of the lungs to movement of the rib cage.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-24. Negative pressure breathing. A mammal breathes by changing the air pressure within its lungs relative to the pressure of the outside atmosphere. During inhalation, the rib muscles and diaphragm contract. The volume of the thoracic cavity and lungs increases as the diaphragm moves down and the rib cage expands. Air pressure in the lungs falls below that of the atmosphere, and air rushes into the lungs. Exhalation occurs when the rib muscles and diaphragm relax, restoring the thoracic cavity to its smaller volume.

Lung volume increases as a result of contraction of the rib muscles and the diaphragm, a sheet of skeletal muscle that forms the bottom wall of the chest cavity. Contraction of the rib muscles expands the rib cage by pulling the ribs upward and the breastbone outward. At the same time, the chest cavity expands as the diaphragm contracts and descends like a piston. All these changes increase the lung volume, and as a result, air pressure within the alveoli becomes lower than atmospheric pressure. Because gas flows from a region of higher pressure to a region of lower pressure, air rushes through the nostrils and down the breathing tubes to the alveoli. During exhalation, the rib muscles and diaphragm relax, lung volume is reduced, and the increase in air pressure within the alveoli forces air up the breathing tubes and out through the nostrils (see FIGURE 42.24).

Actions of the rib muscles and diaphragm accounts for changes in lung volume during shallow breathing, when a mammal is at rest. During vigorous exercise, other muscles of the neck, back, and chest further increase ventilation volume by raising the rib cage even more. In some species, the rhythmic movements during running cause visceral organs, including the stomach and liver, to slide forward and backward in the body cavity with each stride. This "visceral pump" further increases ventilation volume by adding to the piston-like action of the diaphragm.

The volume of air an animal inhales and exhales with each breath is called tidal volume. It averages about 500 mL in resting humans. The maximum tidal volume during forced breathing is the vital capacity, which is about 3.4 L and 4.8 L for college-age females and males, respectively. The lungs hold more air than the vital capacity, but since it is impossible to completely collapse the alveoli, a residual volume of air remains in the lungs even after we forcefully exhale as much as we can. As lungs lose their resilience as a result of aging or disease (such as emphysema), residual volume increases at the expense of vital capacity. Since the lungs do not completely empty and refill with each breath cycle, newly inhaled air is mixed with oxygen-depleted residual air, and the maximum oxygen concentration in alveoli is considerably less than in the atmosphere. This limits the effectiveness of gas exchange.

Ventilation is much more complex in birds than in mammals. Besides lungs, birds have eight or nine air sacs that penetrate the abdomen, neck, and even the wings. The air sacs do not function directly in gas exchange, but act as bellows that keep air flowing through the lungs (FIGURE 42.25). They may also reduce the density of the bird, an adaptation for flight (see Chapter 34). The entire system--lungs and air sacs--is ventilated when the bird breathes. Air flows through the interconnected system in a circuit that passes through the lungs in one direction only, regardless of whether the bird is inhaling or exhaling. Instead of alveoli, which are dead ends, the sites of gas exchange in bird lungs are tiny channels called parabronchi, through which air flows in one direction.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-25. The avian respiratory system. Contraction and relaxation of the air sacs ventilates the lungs, forcing air in one direction (magenta arrows) through tiny parallel tubes in the lungs called parabronchi (inset, SEM). Gas exchange occurs across the walls of the parabronchi. During inhalation, both sets of air sacs expand. The posterior sacs fill with fresh air (blue) from the outside, while the anterior sacs fill with stale air (gray) from the lungs. During exhalation, both sets of air sacs deflate, forcing air from the posterior sacs into the lungs, and air from the anterior sacs out of the system via the trachea. Two cycles of inhalation and exhalation are required for the air to pass all the way through the system and out of the bird.

This system completely exchanges the air in the lungs with every breath, so maximum lung oxygen concentrations are higher in birds than in mammals. Partly because of this advantage, birds perform much better than mammals at high altitude. For example, human mountaineers experience tremendous difficulty obtaining enough oxygen when climbing the Earth's highest peaks, such as Mt. Everest in the Himalayas (8,848 m)--but several species of birds (notably the bar-headed goose) easily fly over the same mountains at altitudes of 9,000 m or more during migration.




