
 Morgan traced a gene to a specific chromosome

Thomas Hunt Morgan, an embryologist at Columbia University, was the first to associate a specific gene with a specific chromosome, early in the 20th century. Although Morgan was skeptical about both Mendelism and the chromosome theory, his early experiments provided convincing evidence that chromosomes are indeed the location of Mendel's heritable factors.

Morgan's Choice of Experimental Organism

Many times in the history of biology, important discoveries have come to those insightful enough or lucky enough to choose an experimental organism suitable for the research problem being tackled. Mendel chose the garden pea because a number of distinct varieties were available. For his work, Morgan selected a species of fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, a common, generally innocuous insect that feeds on the fungi growing on fruit. (Some other kinds of fruit flies, such as "medflies,"Ceratitis capitata, can seriously damage crops.) Fruit flies are prolific breeders; a single mating will produce hundreds of offspring, and a new generation can be bred every two weeks. These characteristics make the fruit fly a convenient organism for genetic studies. Morgan's laboratory soon became known as "the fly room."

Another advantage of the fruit fly is that it has only four pairs of chromosomes, which are easily distinguishable with a light microscope. There are three pairs of autosomes and one pair of sex chromosomes. Female fruit flies have a homologous pair of X chromosomes, and males have one X chromosome and one Y chromosome.

While Mendel could readily obtain different pea varieties, there were no convenient suppliers of fruit fly varieties for Morgan to employ. Indeed, he was probably the first person to want different varieties of this common insect. After a year of breeding flies and looking for variant individuals, Morgan was rewarded with the discovery of a single male fly with white eyes instead of the usual red. The normal phenotype for a character (the phenotype most common in natural populations), such as red eyes in Drosophila, is called the wild type (FIGURE 15.2). Traits that are alternatives to the wild type, such as white eyes in Drosophila, are called mutant phenotypes, because they are due to alleles assumed to have originated as changes, or mutations, in the wild-type allele.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 15-2. Morgan's first mutant. Wild-type Drosophila flies have red eyes (left). Among his flies, Morgan discovered a mutant male with white eyes (right). This variation made it possible for Morgan to trace a gene for eye color to a specific chromosome (LMs).

Discovery of Sex Linkage

After Morgan discovered his white-eyed male fly, he mated it with a red-eyed female. All the F1 offspring had red eyes, suggesting that the wild type was dominant. When Morgan bred the F1 flies to each other, he observed the classical 3:1 phenotypic ratio among the F2 offspring. However, there was a surprising additional result: The white-eye trait showed up only in males. All the F2 females had red eyes, while half the males had red eyes and half had white eyes. Somehow, a fly's eye color was linked to its sex.

From this and other evidence, Morgan deduced that the gene affected in his white-eyed mutant is located exclusively on the X chromosome; there is no corresponding eye-color locus on the Y chromosome (FIGURE 15.3, p. 272). Thus, females (XX) carry two copies of the gene for this character, while males (XY) carry only one. Because the mutant allele is recessive, a female will have white eyes only if she receives that allele on both X chromosomes--an impossibility for the F2 females in Morgan's experiment. For a male, on the other hand, a single copy of the mutant allele confers white eyes; since a male has only one X chromosome, there can be no wild-type allele present to offset the recessive allele.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 15-3. Sex-linked inheritance. When Morgan bred his mutant male to a wild-type female, all F1 offspring had red eyes. The F2 generation showed a typical Mendelian 3:1 ratio of traits, but the recessive trait--white eyes--was linked to sex. All females had red eyes, but half the males had white eyes. Morgan hypothesized that the gene responsible was located on the X chromosome and that there was no corresponding locus on the Y chromosome.

Genes located on a sex chromosome are called sex-linked genes. Morgan's evidence that a specific gene is carried on the X chromosome added credibility to the chromosome theory of inheritance. Recognizing the importance of this work, many bright students were attracted to Morgan's fly room, and his laboratory dominated genetics research for the next three decades. We will see the influence of Morgan and his colleagues as we consider some other important aspects of the chromosomal basis of inheritance.




