
Chapter 45: CHEMICAL SIGNALS IN ANIMALS

AN INTRODUCTION TO REGULATORY SYSTEMS

   The endocrine system and the nervous system are structurally, chemically, and functionally related

   Invertebrate regulatory systems clearly illustrate endocrine and nervous system interactions



CHEMICAL SIGNALS AND THEIR MODES OF ACTION

   A variety of local regulators affect neighboring target cells

   Most chemical signals bind to plasma-membrane proteins, initiating signal-transduction pathways

   Steroid hormones, thyroid hormones, and some local regulators enter target cells and bind to intracellular receptors



THE VERTEBRATE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM

   The hypothalamus and pituitary integrate many functions of the vertebrate endocrine system

   The pineal gland is involved in biorhythms

   Thyroid hormones function in development, bioenergetics, and homeostasis

   Parathyroid hormone and calcitonin balance blood calcium

   Endocrine tissues of the pancreas secrete insulin and glucagon, antagonistic hormones that regulate blood glucose

   The adrenal medulla and adrenal cortex help the body manage stress

   Gonadal steroids regulate growth, development, reproductive cycles, and sexual behavior

People offer hormones as an explanation for the howling of alley cats and the moodiness of teenagers. Over a million diabetics in the United States take the hormone insulin, and other hormones are used in cosmetics intended to keep the skin smooth or are added to livestock feed to fatten cattle. The monarch butterfly in the photograph that opens this chapter has just emerged from the silvery cocoon attached to the twig above it. In becoming an adult, the butterfly has undergone a complete change of body form, a metamorphosis regulated by hormones. Internal communication involving those hormones makes it possible for different parts of the insect's body to develop in concert.

An animal hormone (from the Greek hormon, excite) is a chemical signal that is secreted into body fluids, most often into the blood, and communicates regulatory messages within the body. Hormones may reach all parts of the body, but only certain types of cells, the target cells, are equipped to respond. Thus, a given hormone traveling in the bloodstream elicits specific responses--a change in metabolism, for example--from selected target cells, while other cell types ignore that particular hormone.

This chapter's focus is internal chemical signals--what they are and how they function within an animal's body. Our over-arching theme is the role of chemical signals in maintaining homeostasis, a dynamic, steady state in body functions.




