
 What is theoretical about the Darwinian view of life?

Some people dismiss Darwinism as "just a theory." This tactic for nullifying the evolutionary view of life has two flaws. First, it fails to separate Darwin's two claims: that modern species evolved from ancestral forms and that natural selection is the main mechanism for this evolution. The conclusion that life has evolved is based on historical evidence--the signs of evolution discussed in the previous section.

What, then, is theoretical about evolution? Theories are our attempts to explain facts and integrate them with overarching concepts. To biologists, Darwin's theory of evolution is natural selection--the mechanism Darwin proposed to explain the historical facts of evolution documented by fossils, biogeography, and other types of evidence.

So the "just a theory" argument concerns only Darwin's second point, his theory of natural selection. This brings us to the second flaw in the "just a theory" case. The term theory has a very different meaning in science than in everyday use. The colloquial use of the word theory comes close to what scientists mean by a hypothesis. In science, a theory is more comprehensive than a hypothesis. A theory, such as Newton's theory of gravitation or Darwin's theory of natural selection, accounts for many facts and attempts to explain a great variety of phenomena. Such a unifying theory does not become widely accepted in science unless its predictions stand up to thorough and continual testing by experiments and observations (see Chapter 1). Even then, good scientists do not allow theories to become dogma. For example, many evolutionary biologists now question whether natural selection alone accounts for the evolutionary history observed in the fossil record.

The study of evolution is livelier than ever, and we will evaluate some of the current debates in the next three chapters. But these questions about how life evolves in no way imply that most biologists consider evolution itself to be "just a theory." Debates about evolutionary theory are like arguments over competing theories about gravity; we know that objects keep right on falling while we debate the cause.

By attributing the diversity of life to natural causes rather than to supernatural creation, Darwin gave biology a sound, scientific basis (FIGURE 22.18). Nevertheless, the diverse products of evolution are elegant and inspiring. As Darwin said in the closing paragraph of The Origin of Species, "There is grandeur in this view of life."



Click image to enlarge



Fig 22-18. Charles Darwin in 1859, the year The Origin of Species was published.




