
 Primary growth: Apical meristems extend roots and shoots by giving rise to the primary plant body

Primary growth produces the primary plant body--the parts of the root and shoot systems produced by apical meristems. An herbaceous plant and the youngest parts of a woody plant represent the primary plant body. Although apical meristems are responsible for the extension of both roots and shoots, there are important differences in the primary growth of these two systems.

Primary Growth of Roots

The root tip is covered by a thimblelike root cap, which physically protects the delicate meristem as the root pushes through the abrasive soil during primary growth. The cap also secretes a polysaccharide slime that lubricates the soil around the growing root tip. Growth in length is concentrated near the root's tip, where three zones of cells at successive stages of primary growth are located. From the root tip upward, they are the zone of cell division, the zone of elongation, and the zone of maturation. These regions grade together, with no sharp boundaries (FIGURE 35.14).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-14. Primary growth of a root. The diagram and light micrograph take us into the tip of an onion root. Mitosis is concentrated in the zone of cell division, where the apical meristem and its products, the three primary meristems, are located. The apical meristem also maintains the root cap by generating new cells that replace those that are sloughed off. If the apical meristem is damaged, its quiescent center is activated and restores the meristem by means of cell division. Most lengthening of the root is concentrated in the zone of elongation. Cells become functionally mature in the zone of maturation. The zones of the root grade into one another without sharp boundaries.

The zone of cell division includes the apical meristem and its derivatives, called primary meristems. The apical meristem, at the heart of the zone of cell division, produces the cells of the primary meristems and also replaces cells of the root cap that are sloughed off. Near the center of the apical meristem is the quiescent center, a population of cells that divide much more slowly than the other meristematic cells. Cells of the quiescent center are relatively resistant to damage from radiation and toxic chemicals, and they may function as reserves that can be recruited to restore the meristem if it is somehow damaged. In experiments where part of the apical meristem is removed, cells of the quiescent center become more mitotically active and produce a new meristem.

Just above the apical meristem, the products of its cell division form three concentric cylinders of cells that continue to divide for some time. These are the primary meristems--the protoderm, procambium, and ground meristem--that will produce the three primary tissue systems of the root: dermal, vascular, and ground tissues.

The zone of cell division blends into the zone of elongation. Here the cells elongate, sometimes to more than ten times their original length. Although the meristem provides the new cells for growth, the elongation of cells is mainly responsible for pushing the root tip, including the meristem, ahead. The meristem sustains growth by continuously adding cells to the youngest end of the zone of elongation.

Even before they finish elongating, the cells of the root begin to specialize in structure and function where the zone of elongation grades into the zone of maturation. In this region of the root, the three tissue systems produced by primary growth complete their differentiation, their cells becoming functionally mature.

Primary Tissues of Roots. The three primary meristems give rise to the three primary tissues of roots. The light micrographs in FIGURE 35.15 show, in transverse (cross) section, the three primary tissue systems in the roots of a dicot (Ranunculus, a buttercup) and a monocot (Zea, corn). The protoderm, the outermost primary meristem, gives rise to the epidermis, a single layer of cells covering the root. Water and minerals absorbed by the plant from the soil must enter through the epidermis. The root hairs enhance this process by greatly increasing the surface area of epidermal cells.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-15. Organization of primary tissues in young roots. Parts (a) and (b) show, in transverse (cross) section, the three primary tissue systems in the roots of a dicot (Ranunculus, a buttercup) and a monocot (Zea, corn). (All LMs)

The procambium gives rise to the stele, which in roots is a central cylinder of vascular tissue where both xylem and phloem develop. The main difference between dicot and monocot roots is the organization of tissues within the stele. In dicot roots, the stele is a cylinder made up almost entirely of differentiated phloem and xylem cells. In monocot roots, however, the most centrally located cells in the stele do not typically differentiate, remaining instead as unspecialized parenchyma cells. Although this region is often referred to as pith, it should not be confused with the stem pith, which is part of the ground tissue system rather than the vascular tissue system. In dicots, the xylem cells radiate from the center of the stele in two or more spokes, with phloem developing in the wedges between the spokes. In the monocot root, the pith of the stele is generally ringed by vascular tissue with an alternating pattern of xylem and phloem.

Between the protoderm and procambium is the ground meristem, which gives rise to the ground tissue system. The ground tissue, which consists mostly of parenchyma cells, fills the cortex, the region of the root between the stele and epidermis. Ground tissue cells of the root store food, and their plasma membranes are active in the uptake of minerals that enter the root with the soil solution. The innermost layer of the cortex is the endodermis, a cylinder one cell thick that forms the boundary between the cortex and the stele in the roots of both monocots and dicots. You will learn in Chapter 36 how the endodermis functions as a selective barrier that regulates the passage of substances from the soil solution into the vascular tissue of the stele.

An established root may sprout lateral roots, which arise from the outermost layer of the stele, the pericycle (see FIGURE 35.15). Just inside the endodermis, the pericycle is a layer of cells that may become meristematic and begin dividing again. Originating as a clump of cells formed by mitosis in the pericycle, a lateral root elongates and pushes through the cortex until it emerges from the main root (FIGURE 35.16). The stele of the lateral root retains its connection with the stele of the primary root, making the vascular tissue continuous throughout the root system.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-16. The formation of lateral roots. In this transverse section of a willow root, a lateral root emerges from the pericycle, the outermost layer of the stele (LM).

Primary Growth of Shoots

The apical meristem of a shoot is a dome-shaped mass of dividing cells at the tip of the terminal bud (FIGURE 35.17). As in the root, the apical meristem of the shoot tip gives rise to the primary meristems--protoderm, procambium, and ground meristem--that will differentiate into the three tissue systems. Leaves arise as leaf primordia on the flanks of the apical meristem. Axillary buds develop from islands of meristematic cells left by the apical meristem at the bases of the leaf primordia.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-17. The terminal bud and primary growth of a shoot. Leaf primordia arise from the flanks of the apical dome. The apical meristem gives rise to protoderm, procambium, and ground meristem, which in turn develop into the three tissue systems. This is a longitudinal section of the shoot tip of Coleus (LM).

Within a bud, leaf primordia are crowded close together because internodes are very short. Most of the actual elongation of the shoot occurs by the growth in length of slightly older internodes below the shoot apex. This growth is due to both cell division and cell elongation within the internode. In some plants, including grasses, internodes continue to elongate all along the length of the shoot over a prolonged period. This is possible because these plants have meristematic regions, called intercalary meristems, at the base of each internode.

Axillary buds have the potential to form branches of the shoot system at some later time (see FIGURE 35.2). Thus, there is an important difference in how roots and shoots form lateral organs. Lateral roots originate from deep within a main root as outgrowths from the pericycle (see FIGURE 35.16). In contrast, branches of the shoot system originate from axillary buds, at the surface of a main shoot. Only by extending from the pericycle can a lateral root be connected to the vascular system. The vascular tissue of a stem, however, is near the surface, and branches can develop with connections to the vascular tissue without having to originate from deep within the main shoot.

Primary Tissues of Stems. Vascular tissue runs the length of a stem in strands called vascular bundles (FIGURE 35.18). This arrangement contrasts with that of the root, where the vascular tissue forms a vascular cylinder in the center of the root (see FIGURE 35.15). At the transition zone where the stem grades into the root, the vascular bundles of the stem converge as the root's vascular cylinder.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-18. Organization of primary tissues in young stems.

Each vascular bundle of the stem is surrounded by ground tissue. In most dicots, the vascular bundles are arranged in a ring, with pith to the inside of the ring and cortex external to the ring (see FIGURE 35.18a). Both pith and cortex are part of the ground tissue system. The vascular bundles have their xylem facing the pith and their phloem facing the cortex side. Thin rays of ground tissue between the vascular bundles connect the pith and cortex. In the stems of most monocots, the vascular bundles are scattered throughout the ground tissue rather than being arranged in a ring (see FIGURE 35.18b). In both monocots and dicots, the ground tissue of the stem is mostly parenchyma, but many stems are strengthened by collenchyma located just beneath the epidermis. Sclerenchyma, in the form of fiber cells within vascular bundles, also helps support stems.

The protoderm of the terminal bud gives rise to the epidermis, which covers stems and leaves as part of the continuous dermal tissue system.

Tissue Organization of Leaves. The leaf epidermis is composed of cells tightly interlocked like pieces of a puzzle (FIGURE 35.19). Like our own skin, the leaf epidermis is a first line of defense against physical damage and pathogenic organisms. Also, the waxy cuticle of the epidermis is a barrier to the loss of water from the plant. The epidermal barrier is interrupted only by the stomata, tiny pores flanked by specialized epidermal cells called guard cells. Each stoma is actually a gap between a pair of guard cells. The stomata allow gas exchange between the surrounding air and the photosynthetic cells inside the leaf. Stomata are also major avenues for the evaporative loss of water from the plant--a process called transpiration.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-19. Leaf anatomy. (a) This cutaway drawing of a leaf illustrates the organization of the three tissue systems: dermal tissue (epidermis), vascular tissue, and ground tissue (the mesophyll region consisting of palisade parenchyma and spongy parenchyma). (b) This surface view of a Tradescantia leaf shows the cells of the epidermis and stomata, with their guard cells (LM). (c) Palisade and spongy regions of mesophyll are present within the leaf of a lilac, a dicot (LM).

The ground tissue of a leaf is sandwiched between the upper and lower epidermis in the region called mesophyll (from the Greek mesos, middle, and phyll, leaf). It consists mainly of parenchyma cells equipped with chloroplasts and specialized for photosynthesis. The leaves of many dicots have two distinct regions of mesophyll. On the upper part of the leaf are one or more layers of palisade parenchyma, made up of cells that are columnar in shape. Below the palisade region is the spongy parenchyma, which gets its name from the labyrinth of air spaces through which carbon dioxide and oxygen circulate around the irregularly shaped cells and up to the palisade region. The air spaces are particularly large in the vicinity of stomata, where gas exchange with the outside air occurs.

The vascular tissue of a leaf is continuous with the xylem and phloem of the stem. Leaf traces, which are branches from vascular bundles in the stem, pass through petioles and into leaves. Within a leaf, veins subdivide repeatedly and branch throughout the mesophyll. This brings xylem and phloem into close contact with the photosynthetic tissue, which obtains water and minerals from the xylem and loads its sugars and other organic products into the phloem for shipment to other parts of the plant. The vascular infrastructure also functions as a skeleton that reinforces the shape of the leaf.




