
 Plant tissues are composed of three basic cell types: parenchyma, collenchyma, and sclerenchyma

A multicellular organism is characterized by a division of labor among cell types specialized for different functions. As you consider each major type of plant cell, notice the structural adaptations that make specific functions possible. In some cases, we will find distinguishing characteristics within the protoplast, the cell contents exclusive of the cell wall. For example, only the protoplasts of photosynthetic cells contain chloroplasts. But modifications of cell walls are also important in how the specialized cells of a plant function. FIGURE 35.10 will help you review the general structure of plant cells before you proceed to our survey of specific cell types.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-10. Review of general plant cell structure.

Parenchyma Cells

Mature parenchyma cells have primary walls that are relatively thin and flexible, and most lack secondary walls. The protoplast generally has a large central vacuole. Parenchyma cells are often depicted as "typical" plant cells because they generally are the least specialized (FIGURE 35.11a, p. 728), but there are exceptions. For example, the highly specialized cells that function in the transport of sugar sap in the phloem--the sieve-tube members--are thin walled and living and are examples of parenchyma cells.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-11. The three major categories of plant cells.

Parenchyma cells perform most of the metabolic functions of the plant, synthesizing and storing various organic products. For example, photosynthesis occurs within the chloroplasts of parenchyma cells in the leaf. Some parenchyma cells in stems and roots have colorless plastids that store starch. And the fleshy tissue of most fruit is composed mostly of parenchyma cells.

Developing plant cells of all types are parenchyma cells before specializing further in structure and function. Those cells that retain the less specialized condition and become mature parenchyma cells do not generally undergo cell division. Most of them, however, retain the ability to divide and differentiate into other types of plant cells under special conditions--during the repair and replacement of organs after injury to the plant, for example. It is even possible in the laboratory to regenerate an entire plant from a single parenchyma cell.

Collenchyma Cells

Collenchyma cells have thicker primary walls than parenchyma cells, though the walls are unevenly thickened (FIGURE 35.11b). Grouped in strands or cylinders, collenchyma cells help support young parts of the plant shoot. Young stems and petioles often have a cylinder of collenchyma just below their surface (the "strings" of a celery stalk, for example). Because they lack secondary walls and the hardening agent lignin is absent in their primary walls, collenchyma cells provide support without restraining growth. Unlike sclerenchyma cells, which we discuss next, mature, functioning collenchyma cells are living and flexible and elongate with the stems and leaves they support.

Sclerenchyma Cells

Also functioning as supporting elements in the plant, but with thick secondary walls usually strengthened by lignin, sclerenchyma cells are much more rigid than collenchyma cells. Mature sclerenchyma cells cannot elongate, and they occur in regions of the plant that have stopped growing in length. So specialized are sclerenchyma cells for support that many are dead at functional maturity, but they produce secondary walls before the protoplast dies. The rigid walls remain as a "skeleton" that supports the plant. In parts of the plant that are still elongating, the secondary walls of sclerenchyma are deposited unevenly in spiral or ring patterns like the wire helix that reinforces the wall of a vacuum hose. These forms of cell wall thickenings enable the cell wall to stretch like a spring as the cell grows.

The water-conducting vessel elements and tracheids in the xylem are sclerenchyma cells with dual functions: support and transport. But there are also two types of sclerenchyma cells called fibers and sclereids that specialize entirely in support (see FIGURE 35.11c). Long, slender, and tapered, fibers usually occur in groups. Some plant fibers are used commercially, such as hemp fibers for making rope and flax fibers for weaving into linen. Sclereids, which are shorter than fibers and irregular in shape, impart the hardness to nutshells and seed coats and the gritty texture to pear fruits.

So far, our description of the types of plant tissues and cells has focused on their structure and arrangement in mature organs of the plant. But how does this organization arise? A major difference between plants and most animals is that the growth and development of plants is not just limited to an embryonic or juvenile period, but occurs throughout the life of the plant. At any given instance, a typical plant consists of embryonic organs, developing organs, and mature organs.




