
 Many prokaryotes are motile

About half of all prokaryotes are capable of directional movement. Some species exceed speeds of 50 &uuml;m/sec, or about 100 times their body length per second.

Flagellar action is the most common mechanism of movement among prokaryotes. Flagella may be scattered over the entire cell surface or concentrated at one or both ends of the cell. The flagella of prokaryotes and eukaryotes differ in both structure and function. (To review eukaryotic flagella, see Chapter 7.) Prokaryotic flagella are one-tenth the width of eukaryotic flagella and are not covered by an extension of the plasma membrane (FIGURE 27.7).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 27-7. Form and function of prokaryotic flagella. Chains of a globular protein, flagellin, are wound in a tight spiral to form a semirigid, helical filament. The filament is attached to another protein that forms a curved hook, which is inserted into a basal apparatus. Composed of about 35 different proteins, the basal apparatus includes a system of rings in the layers of the cell wall (TEM). (The structures shown in this figure are characteristic of gram-negative bacteria.) The basal apparatus--the flagellar motor--rotates the filament, which propels the cell. The motor is powered by the diffusion of protons (H+) into the cell after they have been pumped outward by ATP-powered proton pumps embedded in the plasma membrane.

A second motility mechanism characterizes a group of helix-shaped bacteria called spirochetes. Two or more helical filaments just under the outer sheath of the cell wall are much like prokaryotic flagella in structure. Each has a basal motor attached at one end of the cell. When the filaments rotate, the flexible cell moves like a corkscrew.

In a third mechanism of motility, some prokaryotes that form filamentous chains of cells secrete slimy threads that anchor to the substratum. As the cells continue to secrete jets of slime, the filamentous prokaryote glides along at the growing end of the threads.

In a relatively uniform environment, flagellated prokaryotes may wander randomly. In a heterogeneous environment, however, many prokaryotes are capable of taxis, movement toward or away from a stimulus (from the Greek taxis, to arrange). With chemotaxis, for example, prokaryotes respond to chemical stimuli, perhaps moving toward food or oxygen (a positive chemotaxis) or away from some toxic substance (a negative chemotaxis). Several kinds of receptor molecules that detect specific substances are located on the surfaces of chemotactic prokaryotes. Motile prokaryotes that are photosynthetic generally display a positive phototaxis, a behavior that keeps them in the light. Some prokaryotes even contain a row of tiny magnetic particles that allow the cells to orient in Earth's magnetic field. These particles may help cells distinguish up from down and cause the prokaryotes to migrate toward the nutrient-rich sediments at the bottoms of ponds and shallow seas.




