
 Evolutionarily older structures of the vertebrate brain regulate essential automatic and integrative functions

The Brainstem

The brainstem, sometimes called the "lower brain," forms a stalk with caplike swellings at the anterior end of the spinal cord. The three parts of the brainstem--the medulla oblongata, the pons, and the midbrain--are derived from the embryonic hindbrain and midbrain (see FIGURE 48.19). They function in homeostasis, coordination of movement, and conduction of information to higher brain centers.

The Medulla and Pons. Several centers in the brainstem contain nerve cell bodies that send axons to many different areas of the cerebral cortex and cerebellum, releasing neurotransmitters such as norepinephrine, dopamine, serotonin, and acetylcholine. These signals from the brainstem cause changes in attention, alertness, appetite, and motivation. The medulla oblongata, commonly called the medulla, contains centers that control several visceral (automatic, homeostatic) functions, including breathing, heart and blood vessel activity, swallowing, vomiting, and digestion. The pons also participates in some of these activities, having nuclei that regulate the breathing centers in the medulla, for example.

All the bundles of axons carrying sensory information to and motor instructions from higher brain regions pass through the brainstem, making data conduction one of the most important functions of the medulla and pons. The brainstem also helps coordinate large-scale body movements such as walking. Most of the descending axons carrying instructions about movement to the spinal cord from the midbrain and forebrain cross from one side of the CNS to the other as they pass through the medulla. As a result, the right side of the brain controls much of the movement of the left side of the body, and vice versa.

The Midbrain.The midbrain contains centers for the receipt and integration of several types of sensory information. It also serves as a projection center, sending coded sensory information along neurons to specific regions of the forebrain. Prominent nuclei of the midbrain are the inferior and superior colliculi, which are part of the auditory and visual systems, respectively. All fibers involved in hearing either terminate in or pass through the inferior colliculi. In nonmammalian vertebrates, the superior colliculi take the form of prominent optic lobes and may be the only visual centers. In mammals, vision is integrated in the cerebrum, leaving the superior colliculi to coordinate visual reflexes, such as automatically turning your head when your peripheral vision picks up something moving toward you from the side.

The Reticular System, Arousal, and Sleep

As anyone who has sat through a lecture on a warm spring day knows, attentiveness and mental alertness vary from moment to moment. Arousal is a state of awareness of the external world. The counterpart of arousal is sleep, when an individual continues to receive external stimuli but is not conscious of them. Sleep and arousal are controlled by several centers in the the brainstem and cerebrum.

A system of neurons called the reticular formation, containing over 90 separate nuclei, passes through the core of the brain stem (FIGURE 48.21). Part of the reticular formation, the reticular activating system (RAS), regulates sleep and arousal. Acting as a sensory filter, the RAS selects which information reaches the cerebral cortex, and the more input the cortex receives, the more alert and aware a person is. But arousal is not just a generalized phenomenon; certain stimuli can be ignored while the brain is actively processing other input. Also, specific centers in the brain stem regulate sleep and wakefulness. The pons and medulla contain nuclei that cause sleep when stimulated, and the midbrain has a center that causes arousal. Serotonin may be the neurotransmitter of the sleep-producing centers. Drinking milk before bedtime may induce sleep because milk contains large amounts of tryptophan, the amino acid from which serotonin is synthesized.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-21. The reticular formation. This system of over 90 separate nuclei extends through the brainstem. The reticular formation receives input from sensory receptors (blue arrows). Working closely with the cerebral cortex (green arrows), it prevents sensory overload, filtering out familiar and repetitive information that constantly enters the nervous system. Part of this filtering system, the reticular activating system (RAS), is a vital link in determining states of arousal and consciousness.

Sleep and wakefulness produce different patterns in the electrical activity of the brain, which can be recorded in an electroencephalogram, or EEG (FIGURE 48.22). As a general rule, the less mental activity taking place, the more synchronous the brain waves of the EEG. When a healthy person is lying quietly with closed eyes, slow and synchronous alpha waves predominate. When the eyes are opened or the person solves a complex problem, faster beta waves take over, indicating desynchronization of the parts of the brain.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-22. Brain waves recorded by an electroencephalogram (EEG).

A sleeping person's EEG reflects the fact that sleep is a dynamic process. In the early stages, theta waves, more irregular than beta waves, often predominate. Deeper sleep produces delta waves, which are quite slow and highly synchronized. Deep sleep also includes periods when a desynchronized EEG reminiscent of wakefulness occurs. During these periods, called REM (rapid eye movement) sleep, the eyes move actively across the visual field behind closed lids. Most dreaming occurs during REM sleep. Like sleep, dreaming has been ascribed magical or prophetic importance, but its true function remains unknown.

The question of why we sleep remains a compelling research problem. All birds and mammals sleep and show a characteristic sleep-wake cycle. One hypothesis is that sleep is involved in the consolidation of learning and memory, and experiments show that regions of the brain activated during a learning task can become active again during sleep.

The Cerebellum

The cerebellum develops from part of the metencephalon (see FIGURE 48.19). It functions in coordination and error-checking during motor, perceptual, and cognitive performances. There is strong evidence that the cerebellum is involved in learning and remembering motor responses, because such learning can be blocked by damage to one of its major subdivisions. The cerebellum receives sensory information about the position of the joints and the length of the muscles, as well as information from the auditory and visual systems. It also receives input from the motor pathways, telling it which actions are being commanded from the cerebrum. The cerebellum uses this information to provide automatic coordination of movements and balance. Hand-eye coordination is one example of such a function. If the cerebellum is damaged, the eyes can follow a moving object, but they will not stop at the same place as the object.

The Thalamus and Hypothalamus

The embryonic diencephalon, a division of the forebrain, develops into three adult brain regions: the epithalamus, thalamus, and the hypothalamus (see FIGURE 48.19). The epithalamus includes a choroid plexus, one of several clusters of capillaries that produce cerebrospinal fluid. The epithalamus also has a tiny projection, the pineal gland. The endocrine function of the pineal gland was described in Chapter 45. The thalamus and hypothalamus are major integrating centers.

The thalamus is the main input center for sensory information going to the cerebrum and the main output center for motor information leaving the cerebrum. It contains many different nuclei, each one dedicated to sensory information of a particular type. Incoming information from all the senses is sorted out in the thalamus and sent on to the appropriate higher brain centers for further interpretation and integration. The thalamus also receives input from the cerebrum and other parts of the brain that regulate emotion and arousal.

Although it weighs only a few grams, the hypothalamus is one of the most important brain regions for homeostatic regulation. We saw in Chapter 45 that the hypothalamus is the source of two sets of hormones, posterior pituitary hormones and releasing hormones that act on the anterior pituitary (see FIGURE 45.6). The hypothalmus contains the body's thermostat, as well as centers for regulating hunger, thirst, and many other basic survival mechanisms. Hypothalamic nuclei also play a role in sexual and mating behaviors, the fight-or-flight response, and pleasure. Stimulation of specific centers can cause what are known as "pure" behaviors. For example, rats placed in an experimental situation where they can press a lever to stimulate a "pleasure" center will do so to the exclusion of eating and drinking. Stimulation of another area can produce rage.

The Hypothalamus and Circadian Rhythms.Animals, including humans, exhibit all kinds of regularly repeated, rhythmic behaviors. What maintains our daily rhythms--when, for example, we sleep, our blood pressure is highest, or our sex drive peaks? Many animals exhibit seasonal rhythms, reproducing or migrating only in the spring or fall, for instance. We have already discussed circadian (daily) and seasonal rhythms in plants (see Chapter 39).

Numerous studies have assessed the relative importance of external cues and internal timekeepers in maintaining rhythmic behavior. These studies show that circadian rhythms usually have a strong internal component, referred to as a biological clock. Locating the internal mechanisms responsible for behavioral rhythms has been challenging for researchers. An early hypothesis that the location of these control mechanisms varies across taxonomic boundaries has proved true. For instance, fruit flies (Drosophila) appear to have many biological clocks throughout their body and at the outer edges of their wings. In mammals, a pair of structures called the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) in the hypothalamus functions as a biological clock. Experiments with rodents have revealed that the cells of the SCN produce specific proteins in response to changing light-dark cycles. The function of this or any other biological clock may be the regulation of a variety of physiological processes, such as hormone release, hunger, and heightened sensitivity to external stimuli that motivate specific rhythmic behaviors.

Researchers have also investigated the role of external cues in circadian rhythms. Usually, a clock's rhythm does not exactly match events in the environment, and external cues are necessary to keep cycles timed to the outside world. Light is a common external cue for circadian rhythms; visual information received by the SCN via sensory neurons from the eyes enables the mammalian clock to remain synchronized with the natural cycles of day length and darkness. For example, activity of the North American flying squirrel normally begins with the onset of darkness and ends at dawn, which suggests that light is an important external cue. If a squirrel is placed in constant light or constant darkness, its rhythmic activity continues, but the duration of its activity cycle (one period of activity plus one period of inactivity) falls a little more out of sync with the outside world each day (FIGURE 48.23). The squirrel's internal clock continues to run without external cues, but on its own cycle, which turns out to be 21 minutes shorter than 24 hours. External cues, such as day length and night length, adjust the clock, so that the rhythmic behavior it controls is synchronized with the outside world.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-23. Activity rhythms in a nocturnal mammal. An inhabitant of forests in North America, the northern flying squirrel is active at night and usually sleeps in a nest cavity in a hollow tree from dawn to dusk. (a) To study its activity rhythms, researchers have placed flying squirrels in cages containing an exercise wheel in which a squirrel can run. The wheel is connected to a chart recorder, which moves graph paper past a pen at a fixed speed. When a squirrel runs on the wheel, the pen is activated and marks the graph paper. The graphs shown in (b) and (c) trace the activity of two flying squirrels kept under different light conditions for 23 days. The longer black bars indicate periods of extended activity. (b) This graph shows the activity pattern of a squirrel exposed to 12 hours of darkness, simulating natural conditions. (c) This graph shows the activity pattern of a squirrel held in constant darkness for 23 days. Although the activity of both squirrels remained rhythmic throughout the recording period, with a distinct period of extended activity every day, the high-activity period of the squirrel shifted each day (actually by 21 minutes). After 23 days its period of greatest activity was nearly 8 hours out of synchronization with the actual time of day. (The small magenta arrows indicate when the period of greatest activity began on days 1 and 23.) Experiments with flying squirrels, humans, and other animals show that environmental cues are needed to keep biological clocks tuned to external conditions.

Human circadian rhythms have been studied by placing individuals in comfortable living quarters deep underground, where they could make their own schedules with no external cues of any kind. Under these free-running conditions (see Chapter 39), the biological clock of humans seems to have a period of about 25 hours, but with much individual variation. Like other animals, humans use external cues to adjust their rhythms to 24 hours in the real world.




