
 Phylum Annelida: Annelids are segmented worms

ANNELIDA means "little rings," and a segmented body resembling a series of fused rings is a hallmark of the annelid worms. There are about 15,000 annelid species, ranging in length from less than 1 mm to the 3-m length of a giant Australian earthworm. Annelids live in the sea, most freshwater habitats, and damp soil. We can describe the anatomy of annelids in terms of a well-known member of the phylum, the earthworm (FIGURE 33.23).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-23. Anatomy of an earthworm. Annelids are segmented both externally and internally. Many of the internal structures are repeated, segment by segment. Externally, each segment has four pairs of setae, bristles that provide traction for burrowing. Earthworms and many other annelids creep along or burrow by coordinating two sets of muscles, one longitudinal and the other circular (see FIGURE 49.27). These muscles work against the noncompressible coelomic fluid, a hydrostatic skeleton.

The coelom of the earthworm is partitioned by septa, but the digestive tract, longi tudinal blood vessels, and nerve cords penetrate the septa and run the length of the animal (the major vessels have segmental branches). The digestive system has several specialized regions: the pharynx, the esophagus, the crop, the gizzard, and the intestine. The closed circulatory system consists of a network of vessels containing blood with oxygen-carrying hemoglobin. Dorsal and ventral vessels are connected by segmental pairs of vessels. The dorsal vessel and five pairs of vessels that circle the esophagus of an earthworm are muscular and pump blood through the circulatory system. Tiny blood vessels are abundant in the earthworm's skin, which functions as its respiratory organ.

In each segment of the worm is a pair of excretory tubes called metanephridia with ciliated funnels, called nephrostomes, that remove wastes from the blood and coelomic fluid. The metanephridia lead to exterior pores, through which the metabolic wastes are discharged.

A brainlike pair of cerebral ganglia lies above and in front of the pharynx. A ring of nerves around the pharynx connects to a subpharyngeal ganglion, from which a fused pair of nerve cords runs posteriorly. All along these ventral nerve cords are segmental ganglia, also fused.

Earthworms are hermaphrodites, but they cross-fertilize. Two earthworms mate by aligning themselves in such a way that they exchange sperm, and then they separate. The received sperm cells are stored temporarily while a special organ, the clitellum, secretes a mucous cocoon. The cocoon slides along the worm, picking up the eggs and then the stored sperm. The cocoon then slips off the worm's head and resides in the soil while the embryos develop. Some earthworms can also reproduce asexually by fragmentation followed by regeneration.

Some aquatic annelids swim in pursuit of food, but most are bottom-dwellers that burrow in the sand and silt; earthworms, of course, are burrowers.

The phylum Annelida is divided into three classes: Oligochaeta (earthworms and their relatives), Polychaeta (polychaetes), and Hirudinea (leeches) (TABLE 33.4).

Table 33-4. Classes of Phylum Annelida

Class and ExamplesMain CharacteristicsOligochaeta (terrestrial and freshwater segmented worms; e.g., earthworms) (see FIGURES 33.23 and 33.24a)Reduced head; no parapodia, but setae presentPolychaeta (mostly marine segmented worms) (see FIGURE 33.24b and c)Well-developed head; each segment usually has parapodia with setae; tube-dwelling and free-livingHirudinea (leeches) (see FIGURE 33.24d)Body usually flattened, with reduced coelom and segmentation; setae absent; suckers at anterior and posterior ends; parasites, predators, and scavengersClass Oligochaeta

This class of segmented worms includes the earthworms and a variety of aquatic species (FIGURE 33.24a). An earthworm eats its way through the soil, extracting nutrients as the soil passes through the digestive tube. Undigested material, mixed with mucus secreted into the digestive tract, is egested as castings through the anus. Farmers value earthworms because the animals till the earth, and the castings improve the texture of the soil. Darwin estimated that 1 acre of British farmland had about 50,000 earthworms that produced 18 tons of castings per year.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-24. Annelids, the segmented worms. (a) Class Oligochaeta: Some giant Australian earthworms are bigger than snakes. (b) Class Polychaeta: Most polychaetes are marine worms. Each segment has a pair of lateral flaps that function in movement and as gills for the exchange of respiratory gases with the surrounding water. (c) Fanworms are tube-dwellers that use their feathery headdresses for gas exchange and to extract suspended food particles from the seawater. This species is known as a Christmas-tree worm. (d) Class Hirudinea: A nurse applied this medicinal leech (Hirudo medicinalis) to a patient's sore thumb to drain blood from a hematoma (abnormal accumulation of blood around an internal injury).

Class Polychaeta

Each segment of a polychaete (meaning "many setae," for the bristles on each segment) has a pair of paddlelike or ridgelike structures called parapodia ("almost feet") that function in locomotion. Each parapodium has several setae made of the polysaccharide chitin. In many polychaetes the parapodia are richly supplied with blood vessels and function as gills (FIGURE 33.24b).

Most polychaetes are marine. A few drift and swim among the plankton, many crawl on or burrow in the seafloor, and many others live in tubes, which the worms make by mixing mucus with bits of sand and broken shells. The tube-dwellers include the brightly colored fanworms, which trap microscopic food particles in feathery tentacles that extend from the opening of the tube (FIGURE 33.24c).

Class Hirudinea

The majority of leeches inhabit fresh water, but there are also land leeches that move through moist vegetation. Many leeches feed on other invertebrates, but some are blood-sucking parasites that feed by attaching temporarily to other animals, including humans. Leeches range in length from about 1 to 30 cm. Some parasitic species use bladelike jaws to slit the skin of the host, whereas others secrete enzymes that digest a hole through the skin. The host is usually oblivious to this attack because the leech secretes an anesthetic. After making the incision, the leech secretes another chemical, hirudin, which keeps the blood of the host from coagulating. The parasite then sucks as much blood as it can hold, often more than ten times its own weight. After this gorging, a leech can last for months without another meal.

Until this century, leeches were frequently used by physicians for bloodletting. Leeches are still used for treating bruised tissues and for stimulating the circulation of blood to fingers or toes that have been sewn back to hands or feet after accidents (FIGURE 33.24d).

Before leaving annelids, let's highlight two evolutionary adaptations that are well developed in this phylum: the coelom and segmentation. The evolutionary significance of the coelom cannot be overemphasized. In addition to providing a hydrostatic skeleton and allowing new and diverse methods of locomotion, it also provides body space for storage and for complex organ development. The coelom also serves as a cushion that protects internal structures, and it allows a functional separation of the action of body wall muscles from those of internal organs, such as the muscles of the digestive tract.

Segmentation allows a high degree of specialization of body regions. This regional specialization--groups of segments modified for different functions--is seen to some degree in annelids but is a true hallmark of the body plan of arthropods, as we will see in the next section.




