
Chapter 7: A TOUR OF THE CELL

HOW WE STUDY CELLS

   Microscopes provide windows to the world of the cell

   Cell biologists can isolate organelles to study their functions



A PANORAMIC VIEW OF THE CELL

   Prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells differ in size and complexity

   Internal membranes compartmentalize the functions of a eukaryotic cell



THE NUCLEUS AND RIBOSOMES

   The nucleus contains a eukaryotic cell's genetic library

   Ribosomes build a cell's proteins



THE ENDOMEMBRANE SYSTEM

   The endoplasmic reticulum manufactures membranes and performs many other biosynthetic functions

   The Golgi apparatus finishes, sorts, and ships cell products

   Lysosomes are digestive compartments

   Vacuoles have diverse functions in cell maintenance



OTHER MEMBRANOUS ORGANELLES

   Mitochondria and chloroplasts are the main energy transformers of cells

   Peroxisomes generate and degrade H2O2 in performing various metabolic functions



THE CYTOSKELETON

   Providing structural support to the cell, the cytoskeleton also functions in cell motility and regulation



CELL SURFACES AND JUNCTIONS

   Plant cells are encased by cell walls

   The extracellular matrix (ECM) of animal cells functions in support, adhesion, movement, and regulation

   Intercellular junctions help integrate cells into higher levels of structure and function

   The cell is a living unit greater than the sum of its parts

The cell is as fundamental to biology as the atom is to chemistry: All organisms are made of cells. In the hierarchy of biological organization, the cell is the simplest collection of matter that can live. Indeed, there are diverse forms of life existing as single-celled organisms. More complex organisms, including plants and animals, are multicellular; their bodies are cooperatives of many kinds of specialized cells that could not survive for long on their own. However, even when they are arranged into higher levels of organization, such as tissues and organs, cells can be singled out as the organism's basic units of structure and function. The contraction of muscle cells moves your eyes as you read this sentence; when you decide to turn the next page, nerve cells will transmit that decision from your brain to the muscle cells of your hand. Everything an organism does occurs fundamentally at the cellular level. This chapter introduces the microscopic world of the cell.

This book takes a thematic approach to the study of life, and the cell is a microcosm that demonstrates most of the themes introduced in Chapter 1. We will see that life at the cellular level arises from structural order, reinforcing the themes of emergent properties and the correlation between structure and function. For example, the movement of an animal cell depends on an intricate interplay of structures that make up a cellular skeleton (green in the micrograph above). Another recurring theme in biology is the interaction of organisms with their environment. Cells sense and respond to environmental fluctuations. As open systems, they continuously exchange both materials and energy with their surroundings. And keep in mind the one biological theme that unifies all others: evolution. All cells are related by their descent from earlier cells, but they have been modified in various ways during the long evolutionary history of life on Earth.




