
 Many prokaryotes are symbiotic

Prokaryotes rarely function singly in the environment. More often they interact in groups, which often include other species of prokaryotes or eukaryotes with complementary metabolisms.

Symbiosis (from the Greek word for "living together") is the term used to describe ecological relationships between organisms of different species that are in direct contact. If one of the symbiotic organisms is much larger than the other, the larger is called the host. There are three categories of symbiotic relationships: mutualism, commensalism, and parasitism. In mutualism, both symbiotic organisms benefit (FIGURE 27.15). In commensalism, one organism receives benefits while neither harming nor helping the other in any significant way. In parasitism, one symbiotic organism, called a parasite in this case, benefits at the expense of the host.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 27-15. Mutualism: bacterial "headlights." The lighted oval under the eye of this deep-sea fish is an organ harboring symbiotic bacteria that are bioluminescent. A chemical reaction powered by ATP emits the light. The fish uses its headlamps to lure light-seeking prey and to signal potential mates.

Prokaryotes are represented in all three categories of symbiosis with eukaryotes. For example, plants of the legume family (peas, beans, alfalfa, and others) have lumps on their roots called nodules, which are home to mutualistic prokaryotes that fix nitrogen used by the host (see Rhizobium in TABLE 27.3). The plant reciprocates by providing the pro karyotes with a steady supply of sugar and other organic nutrients. Bacteria inhabiting the inner and outer surfaces of the human body consist mostly of commensal species, but some species are mutualistic symbionts. For instance, fermenting bacteria living in the vagina produce acids that maintain a pH between 4.0 and 4.5, suppressing the growth of yeast and other potentially harmful microorganisms. Among parasitic bacteria are those classified as pathogens because they cause disease in their hosts.




