
 Double fertilization gives rise to the zygote and endosperm

After landing on a receptive stigma, a pollen grain absorbs moisture and germinates--that is, it produces a pollen tube that extends down between the cells of the style toward the ovary (FIGURE 38.9, p. 790). The generative cell divides by mitosis and forms two sperm, the male gametes. The germinated pollen grain is the mature male gametophyte. Directed by a chemical attractant, possibly calcium, the tip of the pollen tube enters the ovary, probes through the micropyle (a gap in the integuments of the ovule), and discharges its two sperm within the embryo sac.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 38-9. Growth of the pollen tube and double fertilization. After a pollen grain is carried by wind or an animal to the stigma, a long pollen tube begins growing down the style toward the ovary. The tube discharges two sperm into the embryo sac of an ovule. One sperm fertilizes the egg, forming the zygote. The other combines with the two polar nuclei of the embryo sac's large central cell and forms a triploid cell that will develop into a nutritive tissue called endosperm.

The events that follow are a distinctive feature of the an giosperm life cycle (shared only with a few gymnosperms, in which the process probably evolved independently). One sperm fertilizes the egg to form the zygote. The other sperm combines with the two polar nuclei to form a triploid (3n) nucleus in the center of the large central cell of the embryo sac. This large cell will give rise to the endosperm, a food-storing tissue of the seed. The union of two sperm cells with different nuclei of the embryo sac is termed double fertilization. Double fertilization ensures that the endosperm will develop only in ovules where the egg has been fertilized, thereby preventing angiosperms from squandering nutrients.

The nonreproductive tissues surrounding the embryo sac have prevented researchers from visualizing fertilization in plants. Recently, however, scientists isolated sperm cells from pollen grains and eggs from embryo sacs and observed the merging of plant gametes invitro. The first cellular event that takes place after gamete fusion is an increase in the cytoplasmic Ca2+ levels of the egg, as also occurs during animal gamete fusion (see Chapter 47). Another similarity to animals is the establishment of a block to polyspermy, the fertilization of an egg by more than one sperm cell. Maize (Zea mays) sperm cannot fuse with zygotes in vitro. This barrier is established as early as 45 seconds after the initial sperm fusion with the egg in maize. The block to polyspermy in animals occurs in two stages; a fast block within milliseconds reinforced by a slow block to polyspermy that requires many seconds. In the case of plants, one hypothesis for the slow block to polyspermy is a deposition of cell wall material that mechanically impedes sperm. Such a mechanism would be analogous to the fertilization envelope that leads to a slow block to polyspermy in several animal species. The opening of ion channels in the plasma membrane of the egg might also lead to a fast block to polyspermy, as occurs in several animal species (see Chapter 47).




