
 Class Chondrichthyes: Sharks and rays have cartilaginous skeletons

The vertebrates of the class Chondrichthyes, sharks and their relatives, are called cartilaginous fishes because they have relatively flexible endoskeletons made of cartilage rather than bone. However, in most species, parts of the skeleton are strengthened by mineralized granules, and the teeth are bony. There are about 750 extant species in this class. Jaws and paired fins are well developed in the cartilaginous fishes. The largest and most diverse subclass consists of the sharks and rays. A second subclass is composed of a few dozen species of unusual fishes called chimaeras, or ratfishes.

The cartilaginous skeleton of these fishes is a derived characteristic, not a primitive one; that is, the ancestors of Chondrichthyes had bony skeletons, and the cartilaginous skeleton characteristic of the class evolved secondarily. During the development of most vertebrates, the skeleton is first cartilaginous and then becomes bony (ossified) as hard calcium phos phate matrix replaces the rubbery matrix of cartilage. Apparently, some modification in the developmental process of cartilaginous fishes prevents the replacement process.

Most sharks have streamlined bodies (FIGURE 34.11a, p. 688). They are swift swimmers, but they do not maneuver very well. Powerful swimming muscles, especially in the caudal (tail) fin, propel them forward. The dorsal fins function mainly as stabilizers, and the paired pectoral (fore) and pelvic (hind) fins provide lift in the water. Although a shark gains additional buoyancy by storing a large amount of oil in its huge liver, the animal is still denser than water, and it sinks if it stops swimming. Continual swimming also ensures that water will flow into the mouth and out through the gills, where gas exchange occurs. However, some sharks and many skates and rays spend a good deal of time resting on the seafloor. When doing so, these fishes use muscles of the jaws and pharynx to pump water over the gills.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-11. Cartilaginous fishes (class Chondrichthyes). (a) Blacktip reef shark. Fast swimmers with acute senses, sharks, such as this blacktip reef shark, have paired pectoral and pelvic fins. (b) Great white shark. A great white shark displays its hinged jaws and toothy mouth, which complement the animal's mobility and sensory equipment as adaptations for a predatory way of life. (c) Blue-spotted stingray. Most rays, such as the blue-spotted stingray, are flattened bottom dwellers that crush mollusks and crustaceans for food. Some other species cruise in open water, scooping food into their gaping mouths.

The largest sharks and rays are suspension feeders that feed on plankton. Most sharks, however, are carnivores that swallow their prey whole or use their powerful jaws and sharp teeth to tear flesh from animals too large to swallow in one piece (FIGURE 34.11b). Shark teeth probably evolved from the jagged scales that cover the abrasive skin. The digestive tract of many sharks is proportionately shorter than the digestive tube of many other vertebrates. Within the shark intestine is a spiral valve, a corkscrew-shaped ridge that increases surface area and prolongs the passage of food along the short digestive tract.

Acute senses are adaptations that go along with the active, carnivorous lifestyle of sharks. Sharks have sharp vision but cannot distinguish colors. The nostrils of sharks, like those of most fishes, open into dead-end cups. They function only for olfaction (smelling), not for breathing. Along with eyes and nostrils, the shark head also has a pair of regions in the skin that can detect electrical fields generated by the muscle contractions of nearby animals. Running the length of each flank of the shark is the lateral line system, a row of microscopic organs sensitive to changes in the surrounding water pressure. A primitive feature and present in most species of aquatic vertebrates, the lateral line system enables the animal to detect minor vibrations. Sharks and other fishes have no eardrums, structures that terrestrial vertebrates use to transmit sound waves traveling through air into the ear toward the auditory organs. Sound reaches the shark through water, and the animal's entire body transmits the sound to the hearing organs of the inner ear.

Shark eggs are fertilized internally. The male has a pair of claspers on its pelvic fins that transfer sperm into the reproductive tract of the female. Some species of sharks are oviparous; they lay eggs that hatch outside the mother's body. These sharks release their eggs after encasing them in protective coats. Other species are ovoviviparous; they retain the fertilized eggs in the oviduct. Nourished by the egg yolk, the embryos develop into young that are born after hatching within the uterus. A few species are viviparous; the young develop within the uterus, nourished prior to birth by nutrients received from the mother's blood through a placenta. The reproductive tract of the shark empties along with the excretory system and digestive tract into the cloaca, a common chamber that expels through a single vent.

Although rays are closely related to sharks, they have adopted a very different lifestyle. Most rays are flattened bottom dwellers that feed by using their jaws to crush mollusks and crustaceans (FIGURE 34.11c). A ray's pectoral fins are greatly enlarged and used like water wings to propel the animal through the water. The tail of many rays is whiplike and, in some species, bears venomous barbs that function in defense.




