
 Neural crest, pronounced cephalization, a vertebral column, and a closed circulatory system characterize the subphylum Vertebrata

The dorsal, hollow nerve cord found in all chordates develops when the edges of an ectodermal plate on the surface of the embryo roll together to form the neural tube. In vertebrates, a group of embryonic cells called the neural crest forms near the dorsal margins of the closing neural tube (FIGURE 34.6). A distinctive feature of vertebrates, the neural crest contributes to the formation of certain skeletal elements, such as some of the bones and cartilage of the cranium (braincase), and many other structures that distinguish vertebrates from other chordates.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-6. The neural crest, embryonic source of many unique vertebrate characters. (a) The neural crest consists of bilateral bands of cells near the margins of the embryonic folds that meet to form the dorsal, hollow nerve cord (neural tube). (b) Cells from the neural crest migrate to distant sites in the embryo, where they give rise to some of the anatomical structures unique to vertebrates, including some of the bones and cartilage of the skull.

The vertebrate cranium and brain (which is the enlarged anterior end of the dorsal, hollow nerve cord), along with the eyes, ears, and nose, are evidence of an important evolutionary feature of vertebrates--a high degree of cephalization, the concentration of sensory and neural equipment in the head (see Chapter 32).

Note in FIGURE 34.1 that these vertebrate characteristics are present in the animals called hagfishes, but the hagfishes lack a backbone of vertebrae. Therefore, the cladogram in FIGURE 34.1 nests the vertebrate clade within a larger clade, Craniata, which is named for the cranium and includes the hagfishes. However, we will include hagfishes in our survey of vertebrates, with the caveat that they represent an ancient branch of Craniata that predates the origin of the vertebral column.

The cranium and vertebral column, surrounding and protecting the nerve cord, are parts of the vertebrate axial skeleton, the main support structure for the axis, or central trunk, of the body. The axial skeleton helps make large body size and strong, fast movement possible. The axial skeleton of most vertebrates also includes ribs, which anchor muscles and protect internal organs. Most vertebrates also have an appendicular skeleton, supporting two pairs of appendages (fins, legs, or arms).

The vertebrate endoskeleton is made of bone or more flexible cartilage, or most commonly some combination of these two materials. Although the skeleton consists mostly of a nonliving matrix, living cells within the skeleton secrete and maintain the materials of the matrix. The endoskeleton of a vertebrate can grow with the animal, unlike the nonliving exoskeleton of arthropods, which must be periodically shed and rebuilt as the animal grows.

When vertebrates move in pursuit of food or when escaping predators, they regenerate their ATP supply mainly by cellular respiration, which consumes oxygen. Adaptations of the vertebrate respiratory and circulatory systems support busy mitochondria in muscle cells and other active tissues. Vertebrates have a closed circulatory system, with a ventral, chambered heart that pumps blood through arteries to microscopic vessels called capillaries that branch throughout every tissue in the body. The blood is oxygenated as it passes through capillaries in gills or lungs.

A vigorous lifestyle also requires a relatively large supply of organic fuel. Vertebrate adaptations for feeding, digestion, and nutrient absorption help support active behavior. For example, muscles in the walls of the digestive tract propel food from organ to organ along the tract. These are all examples of vertebrate form and function having their historical basis in the transition from a relatively sedentary lifestyle to a more active one.




