
 Sexual selection may lead to pronounced secondary differences between the sexes

The males and females of an animal species obviously differ in their reproductive organs. But in many species, there are also marked differences, called secondary sexual characteristics, that are not directly associated with reproduction. This distinction in appearance is called sexual dimorphism. It is often manifested in a size difference, usually one in which males are larger than females. But sexual dimorphism can also be evident in such features as colorful plumage of male birds, manes on male lions, antlers on male deer, and other adornments. In fact, males are usually the showier sex in most cases of sexual dimorphism, at least among vertebrates.

Sexual dimorphism is a product of what Darwin called sexual selection. Today, biologists distinguish between intrasexual selection and intersexual selection. Meaning selection "within the same sex,"intrasexual selection is a direct competition among individuals of one sex (usually the males in vertebrates) for mates of the opposite sex. Males may use secondary sexual equipment such as antlers to battle competitors. This is especially common in species where a single male garners a harem of females. These males may gain their status by defeating smaller, weaker, or less fierce males in combat; more often, they are the victors in ritualized displays that discourage would-be competitors (see Chapter 51).

Intrasexual selection is a familiar sight in nature films, where rams butt heads, and in cartoons of lion kings claiming their thrones. However, intersexual selection is probably more common and, in a way, more intriguing. In intersexual selection, also called mate choice, individuals of one sex (usually females) are choosy in selecting their mates from individuals of the other sex. Apparently, males with the most impressive masculine features are the most attractive to females. A peacock strutting in front of hens with his tail feathers spread into a showy fan is an example of this "choose me" statement (FIGURE 23.16). What intrigued Darwin about such behavior is that some of the features that appear to help attract mates do not seem to be adaptive in any other way and may in fact pose some risk in natural environments. For example, showy plumage may make male birds more visible to predators. But if such secondary sexual characteristics help a male gain a mate, then they will be reinforced over the generations for the most Darwinian of reasons--because they enhance reproductive success. Every time a female chooses a mate based on a certain appearance or behavior, she perpetuates the alleles that caused her to make that choice and allows a male with a particular phenotype to perpetuate his alleles.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 23-16. The Far Side of sexual selection.

When females choose mates, what is the benefit of focusing on secondary sexual characteristics such as showy tail fans? It is unlikely that this is some kind of aesthetic preference. Several researchers are now testing the hypothesis that these sexual advertisements reflect the general health of a male. For example, male birds with serious infections may have relatively dull, disheveled plumage. They don't usually win many females. And for the female that chooses a healthy mate, even if the inclination is just a prewired response to visual signals, the benefit is a greater probability of having healthy offspring.




