
 Genetic analysis ofDrosophilareveals how genes control development:an overview

Pattern formation has been most extensively studied inDrosophila melanogaster, where genetic approaches have had spectacular success. These studies have established that genes control development and have led to an understanding of the key roles that specific molecules play in defining position and directing differentiation. Combining anatomical, genetic, and biochemical approaches to the study ofDrosophiladevelopment, researchers have discovered developmental principles common to many other species, including humans.

The Life Cycle of Drosophila

Fruit flies and other arthropods have a modular construction, an ordered series of segments. These segments make up the body's three major parts: the head, the thorax (midbody, from which the wings and legs extend), and the abdomen (seeFIGURE 21.11, bottom). Like other bilaterally symmetrical animals,Drosophilahas an anterior-posterior (head-tail) axis and a dorsal-ventral (back-belly) axis. InDrosophila, cytoplasmic determinants that are present in the unfertilized egg provide positional information for the placement of the two axes even before fertilization. After fertilization, positional information operating on a finer and finer scale establishes a specific number of correctly oriented segments and finally triggers the formation of each segment's characteristic structures.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 21-11. Key developmental events in the life cycle ofDrosophila.In the top drawing, the yellow egg cell is surrounded by other cells, which form a structure called the follicle within one of the mother's ovaries. The egg cell grows as it matures and eventually fills the egg shell that is secreted by the follicle cells; the nurse cells shrink and disappear. The egg is fertilized within the mother and then laid. The embryo develops within the protective egg shell, as described in the text. The cell layer forming the equivalent of the blastula inDrosophilais called the blastoderm.

The developmental stages ofDrosophilaare illustrated inFIGURE 21.11. The egg cell develops in the mother's ovary, surrounded by ovarian cells called nurse cells and follicle cells. These supply the egg cell with nutrients and other substances needed for development and make the egg shell.
			  
		Following fertilization and laying of the egg, mitosis begins. The early mitotic divisions have two notable features. First, the amount of cytoplasm does not change; the first ten divisions, which occur very quickly, consist of S and M phases only, with no growth. Second, cytokinesis does not occur; the earlyDrosophilaembryo is one big multinucleated cell (in contrast to vertebrate embryos; see, for example, FIGURE 47.8).
			  
		At the tenth nuclear division, the nuclei begin to migrate to the periphery of the embryo, and
			  
		at division 13, plasma membranes finally partition the 6,000 or so nuclei into separate cells. Although not yet apparent under the microscope, the basic body plan--including body axes and segment boundaries--has already been determined by this time. A central yolk nourishes the embryo, and the egg shell continues to protect it.


			  
		Subsequent events in the embryo create clearly visible segments, which at first look very much alike.
			  
		Then, some cells move to new positions, organs form, and a wormlike larva (juvenile form) hatches out of the shell.Drosophilagoes through three larval stages, during which the larva eats, grows, and molts (sheds its tough outer layer),
			  
		eventually forming a pupa enclosed in a case.
			  
		Metamorphosis, the change from larva to adult fly, occurs inside the pupal case, and the fly emerges. In the adult, each segment is anatomically distinct, with characteristic appendages. For example, the first thoracic segment bears a pair of legs, the second thoracic segment has a pair of legs plus a pair of wings, and the third thoracic segment bears a pair of legs plus a pair of balancing organs called halteres.

Genetic Analysis of Early Development in Drosophila

During the first half of the 20th century, biologists made detailed anatomical observations of embryonic development in a number of species and performed experiments in which they manipulated embryonic tissues. This research laid the groundwork for understanding the mechanisms of development. However, these "classical" embryologists were unable to identify the specific molecules that guide development or determine how patterns are established. In the 1940s, one visionary biologist, Edward B. Lewis, of Caltech, showed that a genetic approach--the study of mutants--could be used to investigateDrosophiladevelopment. Lewis studied bizarre mutants, flies with developmental defects that led to extra wings or legs in the wrong places (seeFIGURE 21.14). He located the mutations on the fly's genetic map, thus connecting the developmental abnormalities to specific genes. This research supplied the first concrete evidence that genes somehow direct the developmental processes studied by embryologists. The genes Lewis discovered control development in the late embryo; we'll return to them shortly.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 21-14. Homeotic mutations and abnormal pattern formation inDrosophila.Homeotic mutations cause a misplacement of structures in an animal. These micrographs contrast the heads of two fruit flies (SEMs). Where small antennae are located in the normal fruit fly (left photo), one homeotic mutant has legs (right photo).

Meanwhile, the mystery of pattern formation during early development remained. But in the late 1970s, two researchers in Germany, Christiane Nmsslein-Volhard and Eric Wieschaus, undertook an ambitious quest that finally pushed the understanding of early pattern formation to the molecular level. These scientists set out to identifyallthe genes that affect segment formation inDrosophila. The project was daunting for several reasons. The first was the sheer number ofDrosophilagenes, about 13,000. The genes affecting segmentation might be just a few needles in a haystack or might be so numerous and varied that the scientists would be unable to make sense of them. Second, mutations affecting a process as fundamental as segmentation would surely beembryonic lethals,mutations with phenotypes leading to death at the embryo or larval stage. Because such mutant organisms never reproduce, they cannot be bred for study. Third, because cytoplasmic determinants in the egg were known to play a role in axis formation, the researchers would have to study maternal genes as well as those of the embryo.

N&uuml;sslein-Volhard and Wieschaus dealt with the problem of embryonic lethality by focusing their search on recessive mutations, which could be propagated in heterozygous flies. Their basic strategy was to expose flies to a mutagenic chemical to create mutations in the flies' gametes and then look among the flies' descendants for dead embryos or larvae with abnormal segmentation. By doing the appropriate crosses, they would be able to identify living heterozygotes carrying embryonic lethal mutations. To find as many segmentation genes as possible, they planned asaturation screen:They would make enough mutants to "saturate" the fly genome with mutations. The researchers hoped that the segmentation abnormalities visible in the dead embryos would suggest how the affected genes normally functioned.

After a year of laboriously performing thousands of crosses and examining thousands of dead embryos, N&uuml;sslein-Volhard and Wieschaus succeeded in identifying about 1,200 genes essential for embryonic development, of which about 120 were essential for pattern formation leading to normal segmentation. Over several years, they were able to group the genes by general function, to map them, and to clone many of them. The result was a detailed molecular understanding of the early steps in pattern formation inDrosophila. When their results were combined with Lewis's earlier work, a coherent picture ofDrosophiladevelopment emerged. In recognition of their discoveries, N&uuml;sslein-Volhard, Wieschaus, and Lewis were awarded a Nobel Prize in 1995. Before we discuss how the segmentation genes function, we need to back up and look at the cytoplasmic determinants deposited in the egg by the mother, for these control the expression of the segmentation genes.




