
 Electrons "fall" from organic molecules to oxygen during cellular respiration

The oxidation of methane by oxygen is the main combustion reaction that occurs at the burner of a gas stove. The combustion of gasoline in an automobile engine is also a redox reaction; the energy released pushes the pistons. But the energy-yielding redox process of greatest interest here is respiration: the oxidation of glucose and other fuel molecules in food. Examine again the summary equation for cellular respiration, but this time think of it as a redox process: 

As in the combustion of methane or gasoline, the fuel (glucose) is oxidized and oxygen is reduced, and the electrons lose potential energy along the way.

In general, organic molecules that have an abundance of hydrogen are excellent fuels because their bonds are a source of "hilltop" electrons with the potential to "fall" closer to oxygen. The summary equation for respiration indicates that hydrogen is transferred from glucose to oxygen. But the important point, not visible in the summary equation, is that the status of electrons changes as hydrogen is transferred to oxygen, liberating energy. By oxidizing glucose, respiration takes energy out of storage and makes it available for ATP synthesis.

The main energy foods, carbohydrates and fats, are reservoirs of electrons associated with hydrogen. Only the barrier of activation energy holds back the flood of electrons to a lower energy state (see FIGURE 6.12). Without this barrier, a food substance like glucose would combine spontaneously with O2. When we supply the activation energy by igniting glucose, it burns in air, releasing 686 kcal (2,870 kJ) of heat per mole of glucose (about 180 g). Body temperature is not high enough to initiate burning, which is the rapid oxidation of fuel accompanied by an enormous release of energy as heat. But swallow some glucose in the form of a spoonful of honey, and when the molecules reach your cells, enzymes will lower the barrier of activation energy, allowing the sugar to be oxidized slowly.




