
THE FOSSIL RECORD AND GEOLOGIC TIME

 

 Sedimentary rocks are the richest source of fossils



 

 Paleontologists use a variety of methods to date fossils



 

 The fossil record is a substantial, but incomplete, chronicle of evolutionary history



 

 Phylogeny has a biogeographic basis in continental drift



 

 The history of life is punctuated by mass extinctions



Fossils, the preserved remnants or impressions left by organisms that lived in the past, are the historical documents of biology. The fossil record is the ordered array in which fossils appear within layers, or strata, of sedimentary rocks that mark the passing of geologic time. Paleontologists collect and interpret fossils (FIGURE 25.1). We begin this section by studying how fossils form and how paleontologists determine their age. We then turn to the contributions and limitations of the fossil record in the study of phylogeny.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 25-1. A gallery of fossils. (a) Sedimentary rocks are the richest hunting grounds for paleontologists. This researcher is excavating a fossilized dinosaur skeleton from sandstone in Dinosaur National Monument, located in Utah and Colorado. (b) The hard parts of organisms are the most common fossils. This is a skull of Homo erectus, a human ancestor that lived about 1.5 million years ago. (c) Fossils may become even harder if minerals replace their organic matter. These petrified (stone) trees in Arizona are about 190 million years old. (d) Some sedimentary fossils, such as this 40-million-year-old leaf, retain organic material, including DNA, which scientists can analyze. (e) Buried organisms that decay may leave molds that may be filled by minerals dissolved in water. The casts that form when the minerals harden are replicas of the organisms, as in the case of these casts of animals called brachiopods. (f) Trace fossils are footprints, burrows, and other remnants of an ancient organism's behavior. This boy is standing in a 150-million-year-old dinosaur track in Colorado. (g) This 30-million-year-old scorpion is embedded in amber (hardened resin from a tree). (h) These tusks belong to a whole 23,000-year-old mammoth, which scientists discovered in Siberian ice in 1999.




