
 A polypeptide is a polymer of amino acids connected in a specific sequence

As mentioned in Chapter 4, amino acids are organic molecules possessing both carboxyl and amino groups. The figure at the right shows the general formula for an amino acid. At the center of the amino acid is an asymmetric carbon atom called the alpha (a) carbon. Its four different partners are an amino group, a carboxyl group, a hydrogen atom, and a variable group symbolized by R. The R group, also called the side chain, differs with the amino acid. FIGURE 5.15 shows the 20 amino acids that cells use to build their thousands of proteins. Here the amino and carboxyl groups are all depicted in ionized form, as they usually exist at the neutral pH inside a cell. The R group may be as simple as a hydrogen atom, as in the amino acid glycine (the one amino acid lacking an asymmetric carbon, since two of its a carbon's partners are hydrogen atoms), or it may be a carbon skeleton with various functional groups attached, as in glutamine. (Organisms have some other amino acids, not shown in FIGURE 5.15, but these are not incorporated into proteins.)





a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 5-15. The 20 amino acids of proteins. The amino acids are grouped here according to the properties of their side chains (R groups), highlighted in white. (One group is shown above; the other groups are on page 73.) The amino acids are shown in their prevailing ionic forms at pH 7, the approximate pH within a cell. In parentheses are the three-letter abbreviations for the amino acids. All the amino acids used in proteins are the same enantiomer, called the L form (see FIGURE 4.6).

The physical and chemical properties of the side chain determine the unique characteristics of a particular amino acid. In FIGURE 5.15, the amino acids are grouped according to the properties of their side chains. One group consists of amino acids with nonpolar side chains, which are hydrophobic. Another group consists of amino acids with polar side chains, which are hydrophilic. Acidic amino acids are those with side chains that are generally negative in charge owing to the presence of a carboxyl group, which is usually dissociated (ionized) at cellular pH. Basic amino acids have amino groups in their side chains that are generally positive in charge. (Notice that all amino acids have carboxyl groups and amino groups; the terms acidic and basic in this context refer only to the side chains.) Because they are charged, acidic and basic side chains are also hydrophilic.

Now that we have examined amino acids, let's see how they are linked to form polymers (FIGURE 5.16). When two amino acids are positioned so that the carboxyl group of one is adjacent to the amino group of the other, an enzyme can cause them to join by catalyzing a dehydration reaction. The resulting covalent bond is called a peptide bond. Repeated over and over, this process yields a polypeptide, a polymer of many amino acids linked by peptide bonds (FIGURE 5.16). At one end of the polypeptide chain is a free amino group, and at the opposite end is a free carboxyl group. Thus, the chain has an amino end (N-terminus) and a carboxyl end (C-terminus). The repeating sequence of atoms highlighted in purple in FIGURE 5.16b is called the polypeptide backbone. Attached to this backbone are different kinds of appendages, the side chains of the amino acids. Polypeptides range in length from a few monomers to a thousand or more. Each specific polypeptide has a unique linear sequence of amino acids. The immense variety of polypeptides in nature illustrates an important concept introduced earlier--that cells can make many different polymers by linking a limited set of monomers into diverse sequences.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 5-16. Making a polypeptide chain. (a) Peptide bonds formed by dehydration reactions link the carboxyl group of one amino acid to the amino group of the next. (b) The peptide bonds are formed one at a time, starting with the amino acid at the amino end (N-terminus). The polypeptide has a repetitive backbone (purple) to which the amino acid side chains are attached.




