
 Cellular differentiation depends on the control of gene expression

It is remarkable that cells as diverse as guard cells, sieve-tube members (phloem), and xylem vessel elements all share the same DNA and all descend from a common cell, the zygote. This cellular differentiation occurs continuously throughout a plant's life, as meristems sustain indeterminate growth. Differentiation reflects the synthesis of different proteins in different types of cells (see Chapter 19). For example, two distinct cell types are formed in the root epidermis of Arabidopsis: root hair cells and hairless epidermal cells. Cell fate is associated with the position of the epidermal cells. Immature epidermal cells that are in contact with two underlying cortical cells differentiate into root hair cells, whereas those in contact with only one cortical cell differentiate into mature, hairless cells. A homeotic gene called GLABRA-2 is required for appropriate root hair distribution. GLABRA-2 is normally expressed only in epidermal cells that will not develop root hairs. If GLABRA-2 is rendered dysfunctional by mutation, every root epidermal cell develops a root hair. Researchers demonstrated this by coupling the GLABRA-2 gene to a "reporter gene" that causes every cell expressing GLABRA-2 in the root to turn blue following a certain treatment (FIGURE 35.33).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-33. Example of cellular differentiation. Two distinct cell types are formed in the root epidermis of Arabidopsis: root hair cells and hairless epidermal cells.

What makes differentiation so fascinating is that the cells of a developing organism synthesize different proteins and diverge in structure and function even though they share a common genome. The cloning of whole plants from somatic cells supports the conclusion that the genome of a differentiated cell remains intact (see FIGURE 21.5). If a mature cell removed from a root or leaf can "dedifferentiate" in tissue culture and give rise to the diverse cell types of a plant, then it must possess all the genes necessary to make these many kinds of cells. This means that cellular differentiation depends, to a large extent, on the control of gene expression--the regulation of transcription and translation leading to specific proteins. Cells with the same genomes follow different developmental pathways because they selectively express certain genes at specific times during their differentiation. A guard cell has the genes that program the self-destruction of a xylem protoplast, but it does not express those genes. A xylem vessel cell does express them, but only at a specific time in its differentiation, after the cell has elongated and produced its secondary wall. Researchers are beginning to unravel the molecular mechanisms that switch specific genes on and off at critical times in a cell's development (see Chapters 19 and 21).




