
 Carbon atoms are the most versatile building blocks of molecules

The key to the chemical characteristics of an atom, as you learned in Chapter 2, is in its configuration of electrons, because electron configuration determines the kinds and number of bonds an atom will form with other atoms. Carbon has a total of 6 electrons, with 2 in the first electron shell and 4 in the second shell. Having 4 valence electrons in a shell that holds 8, carbon has little tendency to gain or lose electrons and form ionic bonds; it would have to donate or accept 4 electrons to do so. Instead, a carbon atom usually completes its valence shell by sharing electrons with other atoms in four covalent bonds. Each carbon atom thus acts as an intersection point from which a molecule can branch off in up to four directions. This tetravalence is one facet of carbon's versatility that makes large, complex molecules possible.

In Chapter 2, you also learned that when a carbon atom forms single covalent bonds, the arrangement of its four hybrid orbitals causes the bonds to angle toward the corners of an imaginary tetrahedron (see FIGURE 2.15c). The bond angles in methane (CH4) are 109&#176; (FIGURE 4.2a, p. 54), and they are approximately the same in any group of atoms where carbon has four single bonds. For example, ethane (C2H6) is shaped like two tetrahedrons joined at their apexes (FIGURE 4.2b). In molecules with still more carbons, every grouping of a carbon bonded to four other atoms has a tetrahedral shape. But when two carbon atoms are joined by a double bond, all bonds around those carbons are in the same plane. For example, ethene is a flat molecule; its atoms all lie in the same plane (FIGURE 4.2c). It is convenient to write all structural formulas as though the molecules represented were flat, but it is important to remember that molecules are three-dimensional and that the shape of a molecule often determines its function.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 4-2. The shapes of three simple organic molecules.

The electron configuration of carbon gives it covalent compatibility with many different elements. FIGURE 4.3 reviews the valences of the four major atomic components of organic molecules: carbon and its most frequent partners--oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen. We can think of these valences as the rules of covalent bonding in organic chemistry--the building code that governs the architecture of organic molecules.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 4-3. Valences for the major elements of organic molecules. Valence is the number of covalent bonds an atom will usually form. It is generally equal to the number of electrons required to complete the atom's outermost (valence) electron shell.

A couple of additional examples will show how the rules of covalent bonding apply to carbon atoms with partners other than hydrogen. In the carbon dioxide molecule (CO2), a single carbon atom is joined to two atoms of oxygen by double covalent bonds. The structural formula for CO2 is OCO. Each line (bond) in a structural formula represents a pair of shared electrons. Notice that the carbon atom in CO2 is involved in four covalent bonds, two with each oxygen atom. The arrangement completes the valence shells of all atoms in the molecule. Because carbon dioxide is a very simple molecule and lacks hydrogen, it is often considered inorganic, even though it contains carbon. Whether we call CO2 organic or inorganic is an arbitrary distinction, but there is no ambiguity about its importance to the living world. Taken from the air by plants and incorporated into sugar and other foods during photosynthesis, CO2 is the source of carbon for all the organic molecules found in organisms.

Another relatively simple molecule is urea, CO(NH2)2. This is the organic compound found in urine that W&ouml;hler learned to synthesize in the early 19th century. The structural formula for urea is shown on the following page.
Again, each atom has the required number of covalent bonds. In this case, one carbon atom is involved in both single and double bonds.

Both urea and carbon dioxide are molecules with only one carbon atom. But as FIGURE 4.2 shows, a carbon atom can also use one or more of its valence electrons to form covalent bonds to other carbon atoms, making it possible to link the atoms into chains of seemingly infinite variety.




