
 Mycorrhizae and root nodules may have an evolutionary relationship

There is growing evidence that the molecular biology of root nodule formation is closely related to mechanisms that evolved first in mycorrhizae. In 1997, researchers reported that the nodulin genes activated in the plant during the early stages of root nodule formation are the very same genes activated during the early development of endomycorrhizae. In fact, mutations in these early nodulin genes block development of both root nodules and mycorrhizae in legumes that form both structures. In addition, the signal-transduction pathways that relay messages from the microorganisms to the plant's gene-regulating equipment involved in the development of both root nodules and mycorrhizae may share at least some components. For example, experimental application of plant hormones called cytokinins to root cells of legumes activates expression of the early nodulin genes even in the absence of the bacterial or fungal symbionts. (You will learn more about cytokinins and other plant hormones in Chapter 39.) "Infection" by either the bacteria or fungi causes the concentration of cytokinins in root tissue to increase naturally. These experiments suggest that the hormone is one of the links between the "I'm here" announcement of the microbes and the changes in gene expression in the plant that lead to structural modification of the roots. Even the chemical cues from the two kinds of microbes may be similar. Recall that the Nod factors secreted by Rhizobium bacteria are related to chitins, the same compounds that make up the cell walls of fungi. A reasonable hypothesis is that root cells have a family of closely related receptors that detect their particular bacterial and fungal symbionts.

Mycorrhizae, as you have learned, evolved very early, probably over 400 million years ago in the earliest vascular plants. In contrast, the root nodules of legumes originated only 65-150 million years ago, during the early evolution of angiosperms. The recent experiments revealing common molecular mechanisms in roots' two major symbiotic relationships suggest that root nodule development is at least partly adapted from a signaling pathway that was already in place in mycorrhizae. This is one more example of how evolution can co-opt existing equipment for new functions.




