
 Behavioral ecology emphasizes evolutionary hypotheses

Evolution is the core theme of biology, and the study of behavior in an ecological context emphasizes evolutionary (ultimate) explanations. Behavioral ecology is the research field that views behavior as an evolutionary adaptation to the natural ecological conditions of animals. Natural selection will favor behavioral patterns that enhance survival and reproductive success. Thus, an animal showing optimal behavior maximizes its reproductive fitness. However, most animal behavior is less than optimal; for instance, environmental change or constraints on an animal's sensory powers may result in suboptimal behavior. Therefore, although we can expect animal behavior to be well adapted, it may not be optimally adapted.

In the remainder of this section, we will explore some examples of research in behavioral ecology.

Songbird Repertoires

Many songbirds have a repertoire of song types. Some of these songs sound identical to us but can be easily distinguished when analyzed with an instrument called a sound spectrograph (FIGURE 51.5). Why has natural selection favored this multisong behavior over the expert vocalization of a single tune?



Click image to enlarge



Fig 51-5. The repertoire of a songbird. These sonograms, or "voiceprints," show a graph of a sound's frequency (perceived as pitch) versus time. Four distinct song types of one male brown-headed cowbird are illustrated. Individual cowbirds generally have three to six song types, but other species have dozens or even hundreds of types.

Following the approach of behavioral ecology, you could formulate several testable hypotheses, all starting with "A repertoire increases fitness because&#160;...&#160;" You might postulate that a repertoire increases fitness because it makes an older, more experienced male more attractive to females. For this hypothesis to be true, it must be the case that (1) males learn more song types as they get older, making repertoire size a reliable indicator of age, and (2) females prefer to mate with males having large repertoires. Thus, your hypothesis makes two clearly testable predictions.

To test the first prediction, you can determine whether there is a correlation between a male's age and the size of his song repertoire. If there is not, your hypothesis will be invalidated, which would be informative although perhaps disappointing. As it turns out, some songbird species show this correlation, while others do not. Next, you can determine whether females are more sexually stimulated by a large song repertoire than by a small one. This can be done by playing tape-recorded male songs to females that have been made especially receptive by the temporary administration of a female hormone. Such females indicate their song preferences by assuming a copulatory posture, even though there is no male around. FIGURE 51.6 shows another way to assess female responses. All this work may lead to an evolutionary explanation: Large bird-song repertoires result in females mating more often or earlier in the season with experienced males, who will give their offspring a better chance to survive.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 51-6. Female warblers prefer males with large song repertoires. Male sedge warblers with large repertoires attract females to pair with them earlier in the breeding season, as well as more often, than males with small repertoires. Males with large repertoires, as well as the females that prefer large repertoires, benefit from pairing early because breeding early tends to be more successful than breeding late in the season.

Now suppose you did not use evolutionary principles to guide your research on song repertoires. Without an approach that generates testable hypotheses and predictions, you would probably record observations of numerous aspects of singing behavior. Although these efforts may produce interesting data, they would not explain the behavior. Alternatively, you might hypothesize that repertoires have nothing to do with fitness, but that male birds simply find variety more pleasurable than singing the same boring song over and over again. The method for testing such a hypothesis would not be clear, emphasizing again how much more productive it is to use evolutionary principles as a guide to behavioral research.

Cost-Benefit Analysis of Foraging Behavior

Because adequate nutrition is so essential to an animal's survival and reproductive success, we should expect natural selection to refine behaviors that enhance the efficiency of feeding. Food-obtaining behavior includes not only eating, but also any mechanisms an animal uses to recognize, search for, and capture food items. The term foraging encompasses this full set of behaviors. Optimal foraging theory views foraging behavior as a compromise between feeding costs and feeding benefits. How do foraging behaviors balance the benefits of nutrition against the costs of obtaining food? Some behavioral ecologists are applying cost-benefit analysis to study the proximate and ultimate causes of diverse foraging strategies.

Reto Zach, of the University of British Columbia, conducted a classic cost-benefit analysis of feeding behavior in crows of the Pacific Northwest. Crows are opportunistic feeders that avail themselves of a variety of food items. On Mandarte Island, off British Columbia, crows search the rocky tide pools for gastropod mollusks called whelks. The bird grasps its prey in its beak, then flies upward and drops the whelk onto the rocks to break the shell. If successful, the crow can dine on the mollusk's soft parts. If the shell doesn't break, the crow flies up and drops the shell again and again until the shell breaks. Of course, the higher the bird flies before dropping a whelk, the fewer the number of drops required to break the shell. But there is an energy cost correlated with the height of the crow's ascent. Zach predicted that crows would, on average, fly to a height that would provide the most food relative to the amount of total energy required to break the whelk shells. To determine the optimal height, Zach erected a 15 m pole and then dropped shells of relatively uniform size onto rocks from different heights along the pole. He then tabulated the data and calculated the average total effort required to break shells by dropping them from different heights:

Height of Drops (m)Average Number of Drops Required to Break ShellTotal Flight Height (Number of Drops &#160;X&#160; Height per Drop)255110313395630753515460Note that a height of about 5 m is optimal for breaking shells with the least amount of work. Although dropping the shells from 7 or 15 m resulted in breakage with fewer drops, that advantage was small compared with the effort it would take to fly that high. When Zach measured the average flight height for crows in their whelk-eating behavior, it was 5.23 m, very close to the prediction based on an optimal trade-off between energy gained (food) versus energy expended.

The feeding behavior of the bluegill sunfish provides further support for optimal foraging theory. These animals feed on small crustaceans called Daphnia, generally selecting larger individuals, which supply the most energy. However, smaller prey will be selected if larger prey are too far away (FIGURE 51.7a, p. 1128). The optimal foraging approach predicts that the proportion of small to large prey eaten will also vary with the overall density of prey. At very low prey densities, bluegill sunfish should exhibit little size selectivity, because all the prey encountered are needed to meet energy requirements. At higher prey densities, it is more efficient to concentrate on larger crustaceans. In actual experiments, bluegill sunfish did become more selective at higher prey densities, though not to the extent that would theoretically maximize efficiency (FIGURE 51.7b). Young bluegill sunfish forage fairly efficiently, but not as close to the optimum as older individuals, who are apparently able to make more complex distinctions. It may be that younger fish judge size and distance less accurately because their vision is not yet completely developed; learning may also be involved.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 51-7. Feeding by young bluegill sunfish.

Behavioral ecologists recognize that energy costs and benefits are not the only factors affecting foraging behavior. Animals require not only calories, but also essential nutrients, and this, too, affects an animal's choices of food items. Moreover, foraging behavior tends to minimize the risk of the predator becoming the prey while foraging. As the following example shows, there is more to analyzing foraging behavior than weighing energy costs versus energy benefits.

The smallmouth bass readily consumes both minnows and crayfish. The fact that it does not show an overall preference suggests that the trade-offs balance, with minnows being the optimal prey in some situations and crayfish in others. Minnows contain more usable energy per unit weight (the crayfish has a lot of hard-to-digest exoskeleton), but they may require a greater energy expenditure to pursue. However, even though crayfish may be easier to catch, their large claws and aggressive resistance make them harder to subdue. Trade-offs also include the relative abundance and size of each type of prey. The brain of the smallmouth bass is somehow able to integrate all the relevant variables and formulate responses resulting in a highly efficient foraging behavior that involves switching between minnows and crayfish as conditions change. The proximate mechanisms responsible for this process are not known, but we might predict that they include specific cues that trigger innate as well as mainly experience-based behavior, to which we turn next.




