
 Thyroid hormones function in development, bioenergetics, and homeostasis

In humans and other mammals, the thyroid gland consists of two lobes located on the ventral surface of the trachea (see FIGURE 42.22a). In many other vertebrates the two halves of the gland are separated on the two sides of the pharynx. The thyroid gland produces two very similar hormones derived from the amino acid tyrosine: triiodothyronine (T3), which contains three iodine atoms, and tetraiodothyronine, or thyroxine (T4), which contains four iodine atoms (FIGURE 45.7). In mammals, the thyroid secretes mainly T4, but target cells convert most of it to T3. T3 has greater affinity for the hormone receptor, which is located in the cell nucleus. Thus it is mostly T3 that brings about responses in target cells. The secretion of thyroid hormones is controlled by the hypothalamus and pituitary in a complex negative feedback system (FIGURE 45.8).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 45-7. Two thyroid hormones. Structurally identical, except that T3 has three iodine atoms and T4 has four, these hormones regulate metabolism in most body cells. The thyroid secretes mainly T4, most of which is converted to T3 by an enzyme in target cells. T3 binds more avidly than T4 to receptors in the target cells.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 45-8. Feedback control loops regulating the secretion of thyroid hormones T3 and T4. The hypothalamus secretes TRH (TSH-releasing hormone), which stimulates the anterior pituitary to secrete TSH (thyroid-stimulating hormone). When TSH binds to specific receptors in the thyroid gland, a signal-transduction pathway involving cAMP as a second messenger triggers the synthesis and release of the thyroid hormones T3 and T4. The system is balanced by negative feedback loops. In the two main ones (red arrows), high levels of T3, T4, and TSH in the blood inhibit TRH secretion by the hypothalamus.

The thyroid gland plays a crucial role in vertebrate development and maturation. A striking example is the thyroid's control of metamorphosis of a tadpole into a frog, which involves massive reorganization of many different tissues. The thyroid is equally important in human development. An inherited condition of thyroid deficiency known as cretinism results in markedly retarded skeletal growth and poor mental development. These defects can often be overcome, at least partially, if treatment with thyroid hormones is begun early in life. Studies with nonhuman animals have shown that thyroid hormones are required for the normal functioning of bone-forming cells and for the branching of nerve cells during embryonic development of the brain.

The thyroid gland also plays a vital role in homeostasis. In adult mammals, for instance, thyroid hormones help maintain normal blood pressure, heart rate, muscle tone, digestion, and reproductive functions. Throughout the body, T3 and T4 are important in bioenergetics, generally increasing the rate of oxygen consumption and cellular metabolism. Too much or too little of these hormones in the blood can result in serious metabolic disorders. For example, in humans, an excessive secretion of thyroid hormones, known as hyperthyroidism, produces such symptoms as high body temperature, profuse sweating, weight loss, irritability, and high blood pressure. The opposite condition, hypothyroidism, can cause cretinism in infants and produce symptoms such as weight gain, lethargy, and intolerance to cold in adults.

Another condition associated with a shortage of thyroid hormones is an enlargement of the thyroid called goiter, often caused by a deficiency of iodine in the diet. The feedback system shown in FIGURE 45.8 explains why iodine deficiencies lead to goiter. In the absence of sufficient iodine, the thyroid gland cannot synthesize adequate amounts of T3 and T4. Consequently, the pituitary continues to secrete TSH, leading to an enlargement of the thyroid.

In addition to having cells that secrete T3 and T4, the mammalian thyroid gland contains endocrine cells that secrete calcitonin. This hormone lowers calcium (Ca2+) levels in the blood as part of calcium homeostasis, described in the next section.




