
 Ecological research ranges from the adaptations of individual organisms to the dynamics of the biosphere

Because there are many levels and types of interactions between organisms and their environments, the questions ecologists address are wide-ranging and complex. Ecology can be divided into four increasingly comprehensive levels of study, from the ecology of individual organisms to the dynamics of ecosystems (FIGURE 50.2).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 50-2. Sample questions at different levels of ecology. (a) Organismal ecology. How do diving whales select their feeding areas? (b) Population ecology. What factors limit the number of striped mice that can inhabit a particular area? (c) Community ecology. What factors influence the diversity of tree species that make up a particular forest? (d) Ecosystem ecology. What processes recycle vital chemical elements, such as nitrogen, within a savanna ecosystem?

Organismal ecology is concerned with the morphological, physiological, and behavioral ways in which individual organisms meet the challenges posed by their biotic and abiotic environments. The geographic distribution of organisms is often limited by the abiotic conditions they can tolerate.

A population is a group of individuals of the same species living in a particular geographic area. Population ecology concentrates mainly on factors that affect how many individuals of a particular species live in an area.

A community consists of all the organisms of all the species that inhabit a particular area; it is an assemblage of populations of many different species. Thus, community ecology deals with the whole array of interacting species in a community. This level of research focuses on the ways in which interactions such as predation, competition, and disease affect community structure and organization.

An ecosystem consists of all the abiotic factors in addition to the entire community of species that exist in a certain area. An ecosystem--a lake, for example--may contain many different communities. In ecosystem ecology, the emphasis is on energy flow and the cycling of chemicals among the various biotic and abiotic components.

Looking beyond the four basic levels of ecology, we come to landscape ecology, which deals with arrays of ecosystems and how they are arranged in a geographic region. A landscape or seascape consists of several different ecosystems linked by exchanges of energy, materials, and organisms. The landscape level of research focuses on the ways in which interactions among populations, communities, and ecosystems are affected by the juxtaposition of different ecosystems, such as streams, lakes, old-growth forests, and forest patches that have had their trees removed by clear-cut logging.

The biosphere is the global ecosystem--the sum of all the planet's ecosystems. The most extensive level in ecology, the biosphere includes the atmosphere to an altitude of several kilometers, the land down to and including water-bearing rocks at least 3,000 m belowground, lakes and streams, caves, and the oceans to a depth of several kilometers. An example of research at the biosphere level is the analysis of how changes in atmospheric CO2 concentration affect global climate.




