
 A sporophyte-dominant life cycle evolved in seedless vascular plants

Though pteridophytes lack seeds, they provide clues to the evolution of life cycle adaptations that enhanced the reproductive success of vascular plants on land.

From Cooksonia and the other early vascular plants to all of the vascular plants that live today, the sporophyte (diploid) generation is the larger and more complex plant in the alternation of generations. For example, the leafy fern plants familiar to us are the sporophytes. You would have to get down on your hands and knees and explore with careful hands and sharp eyes to find fern gametophytes, tiny plants growing on or just below the soil surface. Until you have a chance to do that, you can study the sporophyte-dominant life cycle of seedless vascular plants in FIGURE 29.23, page 592, which uses a fern as an example. Then, for review, compare this life cycle with FIGURE 29.16, which illustrates the gametophyte-dominated life cycles of bryophytes. In Chapter 30, you will see that the gametophyte generation became even more reduced during the evolution of seed plants, and it is there that we will consider this trend as an adaptation to living on land.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 29-23. The life cycle of a fern.

We can also use ferns to illustrate a key variation among vascular plants: the distinction between homosporous and heterosporous plants. The sporophyte of a homosporous plant produces a single type of spore. The fern depicted in FIGURE 29.23 is an example. Notice that each spore develops into a bisexual gametophyte having both female and male sex organs, the gametangia called archegonia and antheridia, respectively. In contrast, the sporophyte of a heterosporous plant produces two kinds of spores: Megaspores develop into female gametophytes bearing archegonia; microspores develop into male gametophytes with antheridia. Among ferns, those that returned to aquatic habitats during their evolution--the water ferns--are the only heterosporous species. However, we will see in Chapter 30 that the heterosporous condition was very important in the evolution of seeds.

The following diagrams will help you compare the homosporous and heterosporous conditions: 

The life cycle in FIGURE 29.23 illustrates one more point: The sperm cells of ferns and all other seedless vascular plants (and even some seed plants) are flagellated and must swim through a film of water to reach eggs, a characteristic shared with bryophytes. With their swimming sperm and fragile gametophytes, seedless vascular plants are most common in relatively damp habitats.




