
 Soil conservation is one step toward sustainable agriculture

It may take centuries for a soil to become fertile through the breakdown of rock and the accumulation of organic material, but human mismanagement can destroy that fertility within a few years. Soil mismanagement has been a recurring problem in human history. For example, the Dust Bowl was an ecological and human disaster that took place in the southwestern Great Plains region of the United States in the 1930s. Before the arrival of farmers, the region was covered by hardy grasses that held the soil in place in spite of the long recurrent droughts and torrential rains characteristic of the region. However, in the 30 years before World War I, a large number of homesteaders settled in the region, planting wheat and raising cattle. Both of these land uses left the soil exposed to the danger of erosion by the winds that constantly sweep over the area (FIGURE 37.7). Bad luck in the form of a few years of drought made the problem worse. In many places, 8-10 cm of topsoil were blown away. Millions of hectares of farmland became useless, and hundreds of thousands of people were forced to abandon their homes and land. Better soil conservation practices could have preserved the soil's fertility and sustained agricultural productivity.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 37-7. Poor soil conservation has contributed to ecological disasters such as the Dust Bowl. The widespread planting of wheat and the raising of cattle by homesteaders in the southwestern plains states in the early part of the 20th century, in combination with recurrent droughts, left the land susceptible to wind erosion. The organic matter, clay, and silt in the soil were carried great distances by the winds, in some cases darkening the sky as far as the Atlantic coast. Sand and heavier materials drifted against houses, fences, and barns. In the 1930s, hundreds of thousands of people abandoned their homesteads. Many became destitute migrant laborers in California. Their plight was immortalized as a symbol of the Great Depression in John Steinbeck's The Grapes of Wrath.

To understand soil conservation, we must begin with the premise that agriculture is unnatural. In forests, grasslands, and other natural ecosystems, mineral nutrients are usually recycled by the decomposition of dead organic material in the soil. In contrast, when we harvest a crop, essential elements are diverted from the chemical cycles going on in that location. In general, agriculture depletes the mineral content of the soil. To grow a ton of wheat grain, the soil gives up 18.2 kg of nitrogen, 3.6 kg of phosphorus, and 4.1 kg of potassium. Each year, the fertility of the soil diminishes unless fertilizers are applied to replace the lost minerals. Many crops also use far more water than the natural vegetation that once grew on that land, forcing farmers to irrigate. Prudent fertilization, thoughtful irrigation, and the prevention of erosion are three of the most important goals of soil conservation.

Fertilizers

Prehistoric farmers may have started fertilizing their fields after noticing that grass grew faster and greener where animals had defecated. The Romans used manure to fertilize their crops, and Native Americans buried fish along with seeds when they planted corn. In developed nations today, most farmers use commercially produced fertilizers containing minerals that are either mined or prepared by industrial processes. These fertilizers are usually enriched in nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium, the three mineral elements most commonly deficient in farm and garden soils. Commercial fertilizers, such as those you can buy in a garden shop, are labeled with a three-number code that indicates the mineral content. A fertilizer marked "10-12-8," for instance, is 10%  nitrogen (as ammonium or nitrate), 12%  phosphorus (as phosphoric acid), and 8%  potassium (as the mineral potash).

Manure, fishmeal, and compost are referred to as "organic" fertilizers because they are of biological origin and contain organic material that is in the process of decomposing. However, before the elements in compost can be of any use to plants, the organic material must be decomposed to the inorganic nutrients that roots can absorb. In the end, the minerals a plant extracts from the soil are in the same form whether they came from organic fertilizer or from a chemical factory. Compost releases minerals gradually, however, whereas the minerals in commercial fertilizers are available immediately but may not be retained by the soil for long. Excess minerals not taken up by the plants are usually wasted because they are often leached from the soil by rainwater or irrigation. To make matters worse, this mineral runoff may pollute the ground water and eventually reach streams and lakes. Agricultural researchers are attempting to develop ways to reduce the use of fertilizers while maintaining crop yields.

To fertilize judiciously, a farmer must pay close attention to the pH of the soil. Soil pH not only affects cation exchange but also influences the chemical form of all minerals. Even though an essential element may be abundant in the soil, plants may be starving for that element because it is bound too tightly to clay or is in a chemical form the plant cannot absorb. Managing the pH of soil is tricky; a change in hydrogen ion concentration may make one mineral more available to the plant while causing another mineral to become less available. At pH 8, for instance, the plant can absorb calcium, but iron is almost completely unavailable. The pH of the soil should be matched to the specific mineral needs of the crop. If the soil is too alkaline, sulfate can be added to lower the pH. Soil that is too acidic can be adjusted by liming (adding calcium carbonate or calcium hydroxide).

A major problem with acid soils, particularly in tropical areas, is that aluminum dissolves in the soil at low pH and becomes toxic to roots. Some plants are able to cope with high aluminum levels in the soil by secreting certain organic anions that bind the aluminum and render it harmless.

Irrigation

Even more than mineral deficiencies, the unavailability of water most often limits the growth of plants. Irrigation can transform a desert into a garden, but farming in arid regions is a huge drain on water resources. Many of the rivers in the southwestern United States have been reduced to trickles by the diversion of water for irrigation. (Quenching the thirst of growing cities adds to the problem.) Another problem is that irrigation in an arid region can gradually make the soil so salty that it becomes completely infertile. Salts dissolved in the irrigation water accumulate in the soil as the water evaporates. Eventually, the salt makes the water potential of the soil solution lower than that of root cells, which then lose water instead of absorbing it (see Chapter 36).

As the world population continues to grow, more and more acres of arid land will have to be cultivated. New methods of irrigation may reduce the risks of running out of water or losing farmland to salinization (salt accumulation). For instance, drip irrigation is now used as an alternative to flooding fields for many of the crops and orchards in Israel and the western United States. In another approach to solving some of the problems of dryland farming, plant breeders are working to develop varieties of plants that require less water.

Erosion

Topsoil from thousands of acres of farmland is lost to water and wind erosion each year in the United States alone. Certain precautions can help reduce these losses. Rows of trees dividing fields make effective windbreaks, and terracing a hillside can prevent the topsoil from washing away in a heavy rain (FIGURE 37.8). Such crops as alfalfa and wheat provide good ground cover and protect the soil better than corn and other crops that are usually planted in rows.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 37-8. The Grapes of Wrath. Contour tillage. These crops in Wisconsin are planted in rows that go around, rather than up and down, the hills. Contour tillage helps slow the runoff of water and erosion of topsoil after heavy rains.

If managed properly, soil is a renewable resource in which farmers can grow food for generations to come. The goal is sustainable agriculture, a commitment embracing a variety of farming methods that are conservation-minded, environmentally safe, and profitable.

Phytoremediation

Some areas have become unfit for agriculture or wildlife as a result of human activities that contaminate the soil or groundwater with toxic heavy metals or organic pollutants. Nonbiological technologies to detoxify soils, such as the removal and storage of contaminated soil in landfills, are costly and disrup tive to the landscape. Phytoremediation is an emerging, nondestructive technology that seeks to reclaim such contaminated areas cheaply by taking advantage of the remarkable ability of some plant species to extract heavy metals and other pollutants from the soil and to concentrate them in easily harvested portions of the plant. For example, alpine pennycress (Thlaspi caerulescens) can accumulate zinc in its shoots at concentrations that are 300 times the level that most plants can tolerate. The use of such plants for phytoremediation shows promise for cleaning up areas contaminated by smelters, mining operations, or nuclear testing. Phytoremediation is just part of the more general technology of bioremediation, which includes the use of prokaryotes for detoxifying polluted sites (see Chapters 27 and 55).




