
 Theories of geologic gradualism helped clear the path for evolutionary biologists

Competing with Cuvier's theory of catastrophism was a very different idea of how geologic processes had shaped Earth's crust. In 1795, Scottish geologist James Hutton (1726-1797) proposed that it was possible to explain the various landforms by looking at mechanisms currently operating in the world. For example, he suggested that canyons were formed by rivers cutting down through rocks and that sedimentary rocks with marine fossils were built of particles that had eroded from the land and been carried by rivers to the sea (FIGURE 22.4). Hutton explained Earth's geologic features by the theory of gradualism, which holds that profound change is the cumulative product of slow but continuous processes.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 22-4. Strata of sedimentary rock at the Grand Canyon. The Colorado River has cut through over 2,000 meters of rock, exposing sedimentary layers that are like huge pages from the book of life. Scan the canyon wall from rim to floor, and you look back through hundreds of millions of years. Each layer entombs fossils that represent some of the organisms from that period of Earth's history.

The leading geologist of Darwin's era, a Scot named Charles Lyell (1797-1875), incorporated Hutton's gradualism into a theory known as uniformitarianism. The term refers to Lyell's idea that geologic processes have not changed throughout Earth's history. Thus, for example, the forces that build mountains and erode mountains and the rates at which these forces operate are the same today as in the past.

Darwin was strongly influenced by two conclusions that followed directly from the observations of Hutton and Lyell. First, if geologic change results from slow, continuous actions rather than sudden events, then Earth must be very old, certainly much older than the 6,000 years assigned by many theologians on the basis of biblical inference. Second, very slow and subtle processes persisting over a long period of time can add up to substantial change. Darwin was not the first to apply the principle of gradualism to biological evolution, however.




