
 Class Cephalaspidomorphi: Lampreys provide clues to the evolution of the vertebral column

There are about 35 species of lampreys inhabiting both marine and freshwater environments. The sea lamprey (FIGURE 34.9) feeds by clamping its round mouth onto the flank of a live fish, using a rasping tongue to penetrate the skin of its prey, and ingesting the prey's blood. Sea lampreys live as larvae for years in freshwater streams and then migrate to the sea or lakes as they mature into adults. The larva is a suspension feeder that resembles the lancelets (cephalochordates). Some species of lampreys feed only as larvae. Following several years in streams, they attain sexual maturity, reproduce, and die within a few days.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-9. A sea lamprey. Acting as both a predator and a parasite, a lamprey uses this rasping mouth (inset) to bore a hole in the side of a fish, living on the blood and other tissues of its host.

The notochord of lampreys persists as the main axial skeleton in the adult animal, as it does in hagfishes. However, a lamprey also has a cartilaginous pipe surrounding the rodlike notochord. Along the length of this pipe, pairs of cartilaginous projections extend upward (dorsally), partially enclosing the nerve cord with what may be a vestige of an early stage in the evolution of the vertebral column.

Note again that both hagfishes and lampreys not only lack skeleton-supported jaws but also lack paired appendages. And the skeletons of hagfishes and lampreys are made entirely of cartilage. In contrast, the skeletons of most jawed vertebrates are ossified (hardened with minerals) as bone. In the gnathostomes (jawed vertebrates), the notochord is a larval structure, largely replaced during development by the segmental vertebrae that make up the backbone.

Thus, anatomical comparison of agnathans with gnatho stomes indicates that the brain and braincase (cranium) evolved first in the vertebrate lineage, followed by the vertebral column, with the jaws, ossified skeleton, and paired appendages evolving later. Analysis of the early Cambrian fossils in Chinese strata is consistent with this interpretation (see FIGURE 34.5).




