
 A diversity of photoreceptors has evolved among invertebrates

Most invertebrates have photoreceptors, which range from simple clusters of photoreceptor cells to complex image-forming eyes. One of the simplest is the eye cup of planarians, which provides information about light intensity and direction without actually forming an image. Photoreceptor cells are located within a cup formed by a layer of cells containing a screening pigment that blocks light. Light can enter the cup and stimulate the photoreceptors only through an opening on one side where there is no screening pigment (FIGURE 49.7). The opening of one eye cup faces left and slightly forward, and the opening of the other cup faces right-forward. Thus, light shining from one side of the planarian can enter only the eye cup on that side. The brain compares the rate of nerve impulses coming from the two eye cups, and the animal turns until the sensations from the two cups are equal and minimal. The result is that the animal moves directly away from the light source and reaches a shaded location beneath a rock or some other object, a behavioral adaptation that helps hide the planarian from predators.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 49-7. Eye cups and orientation behavior of a planarian. The brain directs the body to turn until the sensations from the two cups are equal and minimal, causing the animal to move away from light.

Image-forming eyes of two major types have evolved in invertebrates: the compound eye and the single-lens eye. Compound eyes are found in insects and crustaceans (phylum Arthropoda) and some polychaete worms (phylum Annelida). A compound eye consists of up to several thousand light detectors called ommatidia (the "facets" of the eye), each with its own light-focusing lens (FIGURE 49.8). Each ommatidium registers light from a tiny portion of the visual field. Differences in the intensity of light entering the many ommatidia result in a mosaic image. The animal's brain may sharpen the image when it integrates the visual information. The compound eye is extremely acute at detecting movement, an important adaptation for flying insects and small animals constantly threatened with predation. For comparison, consider that the human eye can distinguish light flashes up to about 50 flashes per second. For this reason, the individual images of a movie, which flash at a faster rate, fuse together to create the perception of smooth motion. The compound eyes of some insects, however, recover from excitation rapidly enough to detect the flickering of a light flashing 330 times per second. Such an insect viewing a movie could easily resolve each frame of the film as a separate still image. Insects also have excellent color vision, and some (including bees) can see into the ultraviolet range of the spectrum, which is invisible to us. In studying animal behavior, we cannot extrapolate our sensory world to other species; different animals have different sensitivities and different brain organizations.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 49-8. Compound eyes. (a) The faceted eyes on the head of a fly, photographed with a stereomicroscope. (b) The cornea and crystalline cone of each ommatidium function as a lens that focuses light onto the rhabdom, a stack of pigmented plates on the inside of a circle of receptor cells. The rhabdom traps light and guides it to the receptor cells. The image formed by a compound eye is a mosaic of dots formed by the different intensities of light entering the many ommatidia from different angles.

Among the invertebrates, single-lens eyes are found in some jellies, polychaetes, spiders, and many mollusks. A single-lens eye works on a cameralike principle. The eye of an octopus or squid, for example, has a small opening, the pupil, through which light enters. Analogous to a camera's adjustable aperature (F-stop), the iris of a single-lens eye changes the diameter of the pupil; behind the pupil, a single lens focuses light onto the retina, which consists of light-transducing receptor cells. Also similar to a camera's action, muscles move the lens forward or backward to focus images on the retina.




