
 Edges and corridors can strongly influence landscape biodiversity

The boundaries, or edges, between ecosystems (between a lake and the surrounding forest, for example, or between cropland and suburban housing tracts) and within ecosystems (such as roadsides and rock outcroppings) are defining features of landscapes (FIGURE 55.15). An edge has its own set of physical conditions, such as soil type, topography, and disturbance features, that differ from those on either side. For instance, the soil surface of an edge between a forest patch and a burned area receives more sunlight and is usually hotter and drier than the forest interior but cooler and wetter than the soil surface in the burned area. Blown-down trees are a common disturbance feature of forest edges, which are less protected from strong winds than are forest interiors.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 55-15. Edges between ecosystems. (a) Natural edges between ecosystems. In this landscape in Kakadu National Park in northern Australia, you can see edges of a dry forest, a rocky area with grassy islands, and a flat, grassy lakeshore. (b) Edges created by human activity. Human activities that degrade and fragment habitats often create edges that are more abrupt than those seen in natural landscapes. Pronounced edges (roads) surround clear-cuts in this photograph of a heavily logged rain forest in Malaysia.

Associated with their specific physical features, edges also have their own communities of organisms. Some organisms thrive in edge communities because they require resources of the two adjacent areas. For instance, a bird called the ruffed grouse (Bonasa umbellatus) needs forest habitat for nesting, winter food, and shelter, as well as forest openings with dense shrubs and herbs for summer food. White-tailed deer also thrive in edge habitats, where they can browse on woody shrubs, and deer populations often expand when forests are logged.

The proliferation of edge species can have positive or negative effects on a community's biodiversity. A recent study of edge communities in a tropical rain forest in Cameroon showed that these areas may be important sites of speciation. On the other hand, communities in which edges have proliferated as a result of human alterations often have reduced biodiversity owing to the preponderance of edge-adapted species. For example, populations of the brown-headed cowbird (Molothrus ater), an edge-adapted species that lays its eggs in the nests of other birds, are currently expanding in many areas of the western United States. Cowbirds forage in open fields on insects disturbed by or attracted to cattle and other large herbivores, but they need forests where they can parasitize the nests of other birds. Cowbird numbers are burgeoning where forests are being heavily cut and fragmented, creating more edge habitat and open land for cattle, horses, and sheep. Increasing cowbird parasitism and loss of habitat are correlated with declining populations of several of the cowbird's host species--migratory songbirds such as the yellow warbler, red-eyed vireo, and American redstart.

Another important landscape feature, especially where habitats have been severely fragmented, is a movement corridor, a narrow strip or series of small clumps of quality habitat connecting otherwise isolated patches. Streamside habitats often serve as corridors, and government policy in some nations prohibits destruction of these riparian areas. In areas of heavy human use, artificial corridors are sometimes constructed. For example, highways bisect habitat patches required for survival of the few remaining Florida panthers (Felis concolor coryi). The state of Florida has erected high fences to reduce road kills and artificial corridors under highways to allow movement through protected areas for the panthers (FIGURE 55.16).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 55-16. An artificial corridor. This pass under a highway allows movement between protected areas for the few remaining Florida panthers. High fences along the highway reduce road kills of panthers and other species.

Movement corridors can promote dispersal and reduce inbreeding in declining populations. Corridors are especially important to species that migrate among different habitats seasonally. However, a corridor can also be harmful--as, for example, in the spread of disease, especially among small populations in closely situated habitat patches. The effects of corridors have not been thoroughly studied, and researchers tend to evaluate their potential impact on a case-by-case basis.




