
 The cellular and genomic organization of prokaryotes is fundamentally different from that of eukaryotes

Recall that prokaryotes are named for their lack of true nuclei enclosed by membranes (see FIGURE 7.4). The cells of prokaryotes lack the extensive compartmentalization by internal membranes characteristic of eukaryotes. However, various prokaryotes do have a variety of specialized membranes that perform many of their metabolic functions. These membranes are usually infolded regions of the plasma membrane (FIGURE 27.8).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 27-8. Specialized membranes of prokaryotes. (a) These infoldings of the plasma membrane, reminiscent of the cristae of mitochondria, function in cellular respiration of some aerobic pro karyotes (TEM). (b) Photosynthetic prokaryotes called cyanobacteria have thylakoid membranes, much like those in chloroplasts (TEM).

Compared to eukaryotes, prokaryotes also have smaller, simpler genomes. On average, prokaryotes have only about one-thousandth as much DNA as a eukaryotic cell. In most prokaryotes, the DNA is concentrated as a snarl of fibers in a nucleoid region that stains less densely than the surrounding cytoplasm in electron micrographs. The mass of fibers is actually the prokaryotic chromosome, one double-stranded DNA molecule in the form of a ring. The DNA has relatively little protein associated with it. The term genophore is sometimes used for the bacterial chromosome to distinguish it from eukaryotic chromosomes, which have a very different structure. The genome of eukaryotes consists of linear DNA molecules packaged along with proteins into multiple chromosomes.

In addition to its one major chromosome, the prokaryotic cell may also have much smaller rings of DNA called plasmids, most consisting of only a few genes. In most environments, prokaryotes can survive without their plasmids because all essential functions are programmed by the chromosome. However, plasmids endow the cell with genes for resistance to antibiotics, for the metabolism of unusual nutrients not present in the normal environment, and for other special contingencies. Plasmids replicate independently of the main chromosome, and many can be readily transferred between partners when prokaryotes conjugate (see FIGURE 18.15).

Although the general processes for DNA replication and the translation of genetic messages into proteins are alike for eukaryotes and prokaryotes, some of the details differ. For example, the prokaryotic ribosome is slightly smaller than the eukaryotic version and differs in its protein and RNA content. The disparity is great enough that selective antibiotics, including tetracycline and chloramphenicol, bind to the ribosomes and block protein synthesis in many prokaryotes but not in eukaryotes.




