
 Double circulation in mammals depends on the anatomy and pumping cycle of the heart

A more detailed diagram of blood flow through the mammalian cardiovascular system is shown in FIGURE 42.4, which has numbers keyed to the circled numbers in this text discussion. Beginning our tour with the pulmonary (lung) circuit, 
			  
		the right ventricle pumps blood to the lungs via 
			  
		the pulmonary arteries. As the blood flows through 
			  
		capillary beds in the right and left lungs, it loads oxygen and unloads carbon dioxide. Oxygen-rich blood returns from the lungs via the pulmonary veins to 
			  
		the left atrium of the heart. Next, the oxygen-rich blood flows into 
			  
		the left ventricle, as the ventricle opens and the atrium contracts. The left ventricle pumps the oxygen-rich blood out to body tissues through the systemic circuit. Blood leaves the left ventricle via 
			  
		the aorta, which conveys blood to arteries leading throughout the body. The first branches from the aorta are the coronary arteries (not shown), which supply blood to the heart muscle itself. Then come branches leading to capillary beds 
			  
		in the head and arms (or forelimbs). The aorta continues in a posterior direction, supplying oxygen-rich blood to arteries leading to 
			  
		arterioles and capillary beds in the abdominal organs and legs. Within the capillaries, blood gives up much of its oxygen and picks up the carbon dioxide produced by cellular respiration. Capillaries rejoin to form venules, which convey blood to veins. Oxygen-poor blood from the head, neck, and forelimbs is channeled into a large vein called 
			  
		the anterior (or superior) vena cava. Another large vein called 
			  
		the posterior (or inferior) vena cava drains blood from the trunk and hind limbs. The two venae cavae empty their blood into 
			  
		the right atrium, from which the oxygen-poor blood flows into the right ventricle.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-4. The mammalian cardiovascular system: an overview. The circled numbers are keyed to the discussion in the text. It is as though we are tracking a single blood cell as it flows first through the pulmonary circuit and then through the systemic circuit. However, if we consider the circulatory system as a whole instead of focusing on the path of an individual cell, it is important to understand that the dual circuits operate simultaneously, not in the serial fashion that the numbering in the diagram suggests. The two ventricles pump almost in unison; while some blood is traveling in the pulmonary circuit, the rest of the blood is flowing in the systemic circuit.

The Mammalian Heart: A Closer Look

A closer look at the mammalian heart (using the human heart as an example) provides a better understanding of how double circulation works (FIGURE 42.5, p. 876). Located beneath the breastbone (sternum), the human heart is about the size of a clenched fist and consists mostly of cardiac muscle (see FIGURE 40.4). The two atria have relatively thin walls and function as collection chambers for blood returning to the heart, pumping blood only the short distance to the ventricles. The ventricles have thicker walls and contract much more strongly than the atria--especially the left ventricle, which must pump blood to all body organs through the systemic circuit.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-5. The mammalian heart: a closer look. In this detailed view of the structure of the heart, notice the valves, which prevent backflow of blood within the heart, and the relative thickness of the walls of the heart chambers. The atria, which pump blood only into the ventricles, have thinner walls than the ventricles, which pump blood to the pulmonary and systemic circuits.

The heart contracts and relaxes in a rhythmic cycle. When it contracts, it pumps blood; when it relaxes, its chambers fill with blood. One complete sequence of pumping and filling is called the cardiac cycle. The contraction phase of the cycle is called systole, and the relaxation phase is called diastole (FIGURE 42.6). The volume of blood per minute that the left ventricle pumps into the systemic circuit is called cardiac output. Cardiac output depends on two factors: the rate of contraction, or heart rate (number of beats per minute) and stroke volume, the amount of blood pumped by the left ventricle in each contraction. The average stroke volume for a human is about 75 mL. A person with this stroke volume and a heart rate during rest of 70 beats per minute has a cardiac output of 5.25 L/min. This is about equivalent to the total volume of blood in the human body. Cardiac output can increase about fivefold during heavy exercise. This is equivalent to pumping an amount of blood matching an average person's body weight every 2-3 minutes.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-6. The cardiac cycle. The heart contracts (systole) and relaxes (diastole) in a rhythmic cycle. For an adult human at rest with a pulse of about 75 beats per minute, one complete cardiac cycle takes about 0.8 sec. 
			  
		 During a relaxation phase (atria and ventricles in diastole) lasting about 0.4 sec, blood returning from the large veins flows into the atria and ventricles. 
			  
		 A brief period (about 0.1 sec) of atrial systole then forces all remaining blood out of the atria into the ventricles. 
			  
		 During the remaining 0.3 sec of the cycle, ventricular systole pumps blood into the large arteries. Note that seven-eighths of the time--all but 0.1 sec of the cardiac cycle--the atria are relaxed and filling with blood returning in the veins.

Four valves in the heart, each consisting of flaps of connective tissue, prevent backflow and keep blood moving in the correct direction (see FIGURE 42.5). Between each atrium and ventricle is an atrioventricular (AV) valve. The AV valves are anchored by strong fibers that prevent them from turning inside out. Pressure generated by the powerful contraction of the ventricles closes the AV valves, keeping blood from flowing back into the atria. Semilunar valves are located at the two exits of the heart, where the aorta leaves the left ventricle and the pulmonary artery leaves the right ventricle. These valves are forced open by pressure created by ventricular contraction. When the ventricles relax, blood starts to flow back toward the heart, closing the semilunar valves, which prevents blood from flowing back into the ventricles. The elastic walls of the arteries expand when they receive the blood expelled from the ventricles. By taking your pulse--the rhythmic stretching of arteries caused by the pressure of blood driven by the powerful contractions of the ventricles--you can measure your heart rate.

The heart sounds we can hear with a stethoscope are caused by the closing of the valves. (Even without a stethoscope, you can hear these sounds by pressing your ear tightly against the chest of a friend--a close friend.) The sound pattern is "lub-dup, lub-dup, lub-dup." The first heart sound ("lub") is created by the recoil of blood against the closed AV valves. The second sound ("dup") is the recoil of blood against the semilunar valves.

A defect in one or more of the valves causes a condition known as a heart murmur, which may be detectable as a hissing sound when a stream of blood squirts backward through a valve. Some people are born with heart murmurs, while others have their valves damaged by infection (from rheumatic fever, for instance). Most heart murmurs do not reduce the efficiency of blood flow enough to warrant surgery.

Maintaining the Heart's Rhythmic Beat

The timely delivery of oxygen to the body's organs is critical. For example, brain cells die within a few minutes if oxygen supply is interrupted. Thus, maintaining heart function is crucial for survival. Several mechanisms that assure the continuity and control of heartbeat have evolved.

Certain cells of vertebrate cardiac muscle are self-excitable, meaning they contract without any signal from the nervous system, even if removed from the heart and placed in tissue culture. Each of these cells has its own intrinsic contraction rhythm. How are their contractions coordinated in the intact heart? A region of the heart called the sinoatrial (SA) node, or pacemaker, sets the rate and timing at which all cardiac muscle cells contract. Composed of specialized muscle tissue, the SA node is located in the wall of the right atrium, near the point where the superior vena cava enters the heart (FIGURE 42.7).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-7. The control of heart rhythm. 
			  
		 The SA node, or pacemaker, sets the tempo of the heartbeat by generating electrical signals (gold) that 
			  
		 spread through both atria, making them contract simultaneously. The signals to contract are delayed at the AV node for about 0.1 sec, during which blood in the atria empties into the ventricles. 
			  
		 Specialized muscle fibers called bundle branches and Purkinje fibers then conduct the signals to the apex of the heart and 
			  
		 throughout the ventricular walls. The signals trigger powerful contractions of both ventricles from the apex toward the atria, driving blood into the large arteries. Gold color in the graphs at the bottom indicates the components of an electrocardiogram (ECG) corresponding to the sequence of electrical events in the heart. In step 4, the black portion of the ECG to the right of the gold "spike" represents electrical activity after the ventricles contract; during this phase of the ECG, the ventricles become re-primed electrically and thus are able to conduct the next round of contraction signals.

The SA node generates electrical impulses much like those produced by nerve cells. Because cardiac muscle cells are electrically coupled (by the intercalated discs between adjacent cells; see FIGURE 40.4), impulses from the SA node spread rapidly through the walls of the atria, making them contract in unison. The impulses also pass to another region of specialized muscle tissue, a relay point called the atrioventricular (AV) node, located in the wall between the right atrium and right ventricle. Here the impulses are delayed for about 0.1 sec before spreading to the walls of the ventricles, which ensures that the atria empty completely before the ventricles contract.

The impulses that travel through cardiac muscle during the heart cycle produce electrical currents that are conducted through body fluids to the skin, where the currents can be detected by electrodes and recorded as an electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG).

The SA node sets the tempo for the entire heart, but is influenced by a variety of physiological cues. Two sets of nerves affect heart rate; one set speeds up the pacemaker, and the other set slows it down. Heart rate is a compromise regulated by the opposing actions of these two sets of nerves. The pacemaker is also influenced by hormones secreted into the blood by glands. For example, epinephrine, the "fight-or-flight" hormone from the adrenal glands, increases heart rate (see Chapter 45). Body temperature is another factor that affects the pacemaker. An increase of only 1&#176;C raises the heart rate by about 10 beats/min. This is the reason your pulse increases substantially when you have a fever. Heart rate also increases with exercise, an adaptation that enables the circulatory system to provide the additional oxygen needed by muscles hard at work.




