
 Practice and exercise may explain the ultimate bases of play

Many mammals and some birds engage in behavior that can best be described as play. Such behavior has no apparent external goal but involves movements closely associated with goal-directed behaviors. For example, playful stalking and attacking of conspecifics (other members of the same species) occurs in many predator species, such as those of the cat and dog families (FIGURE 51.12). Although this behavior does not usually involve painful bites, the animals grab and mouth one another, using movements similar to those used to capture and kill prey. A study of bottlenose dolphins in Australia revealed that young dolphins spend long periods away from their mothers in groups of juveniles engaged in a full range of social and sexual play. African lions and dolphins are social animals, and a social lifestyle is one of the hallmarks of mammalian species that routinely engage in play.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 51-12. Play behavior. The roughhousing behavior of these lion cubs evolved in spite of the energy it consumes and the risks it poses. Practicing survival behavior (such as capturing prey), experimenting with social roles, and building a healthy body through exercise are three possible benefits of play.

Another common feature of play is that it is potentially dangerous or costly. Baboons sometimes kill and eat juvenile vervet monkeys, and they are most successful in doing so when the monkeys are playing in groups away from adults. In a study of caged ibex, a type of wild goat, play resulted in at least 5 out of 14 kids sustaining injuries that produced limps. "Horsing around" often produces similar injuries in human kids.

Play obviously consumes energy, and the risks to life and limb result in significant additional costs. What could be the ultimate adaptive basis for such seemingly pointless behavior? The "practice hypothesis" suggests that play is a type of learning that allows animals to perfect behaviors needed in functional circumstances. This hypothesis is supported by the observation that play is most common in young animals. However, movements used in play show little improvement after their first few practices. An equally likely ultimate explanation for play is the "exercise hypothesis," which suggests that play is adaptive because it keeps the muscular and cardiovascular systems in top condition. The exercise hypothesis also predicts that play should be especially common in young animals, because they typically do not have to exert themselves in useful activities while under the protection and care of their parents. However, recent studies of beluga whales and several species of dolphins indicate that play, such as creating complex air bubbles, is also common in adults, at least in captivity.




