
 The four main stages of food processing are ingestion, digestion, absorption, and elimination

Ingestion, the act of eating, is only the first stage of food processing. Nearly all animals, even many fluid-feeders, must deal with food that is "packaged" in bulk form and contains very complex arrays of molecules, including large polymers and various substances that may be difficult to process or may even be toxic. Organic material in food consists largely of proteins, fats, and carbohydrates in the form of starch and other polysaccharides. Animals cannot use these macromolecules directly, for two reasons. First, polymers are too large to pass through membranes and enter the cells of the animal. Second, the macromolecules that make up an animal are not identical to those of its food. In building their macromolecules, however, all organisms use common monomers--for example, soybeans, fruit flies, and humans all assemble their proteins from the same 20 amino acids.

Digestion, the second stage of food processing, is the process of breaking food down into molecules small enough for the body to absorb. Digestion cleaves macromolecules into their component monomers, which the animal then uses to make its own molecules or as fuel for ATP production. Polysaccharides and disaccharides are split into simple sugars, fats are digested to glycerol and fatty acids, proteins are broken down into amino acids, and nucleic acids are cleaved into nucleotides.

Recall from Chapter 5 that when a cell makes a macromolecule by linking together monomers, it does so by removing a molecule of water for each new covalent bond formed. Digestion reverses this process by breaking bonds with the enzymatic addition of water (see FIGURE 5.2). This splitting process is called enzymatic hydrolysis. A variety of hydrolytic enzymes catalyze the digestion of each of the classes of macromolecules found in food. This chemical digestion is usually preceded by mechanical fragmentation of the food--by chewing, for instance. Breaking food into smaller pieces increases the surface area exposed to digestive juices containing hydrolytic enzymes.

The last two stages of food processing occur after the food is digested. In the third stage, absorption, the animal's cells take up (absorb) small molecules such as amino acids and simple sugars from the digestive compartment. Finally, elimination occurs, as undigested material passes out of the digestive compartment.




