
 Complex reproductive systems have evolved in many animal phyla

To reproduce sexually, animals must have systems that produce gametes and deliver them to the gametes of the opposite sex. These reproductive systems are varied. The least complex systems do not even contain distinct gonads, the organs that produce gametes in most animals. The most complex reproductive systems contain many sets of accessory tubes and glands that carry and protect the gametes and developing embryos. Many animals whose body plans are otherwise relatively simple possess highly complex reproductive systems. The reproductive systems of parasitic flatworms, for example, are among the most complex in the animal kingdom (FIGURE 46.6).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 46-6. Reproductive anatomy of a parasitic flatworm. Most flatworms (phylum Platyhelminthes) are hermaphroditic, with complex male and female reproductive systems. Both systems open to the outside through the genital pore. Sperm produced in the testes pass through a pair of ducts (vasa efferentia) into a single sperm duct (vas deferens) and are stored in the seminal vesicle. During copulation, sperm are ejaculated into the female system (usually of another individual) and then move through the uterus to the seminal receptacle. (In some flatworms, sperm are injected into the body tissues through the body wall and then migrate to the female reproductive tract.) Eggs from the ovary pass into the oviduct, where they are fertilized by sperm from the seminal receptacle and coated with yolk and tough shell material secreted by the yolk glands. From the oviduct, the fertilized, shelled eggs pass into the uterus from which they are shed through the genital pore. Usually only a small fraction of the eggs will develop into the next generation of adult worms.

Among the least complex systems are those of polychaete worms (phylum Annelida). Most polychaetes have separate sexes but do not have distinct gonads; rather, the eggs and sperm develop from undifferentiated cells lining the coelom. As the gametes mature, they are released from the body wall and fill the coelom. Depending on the species, mature gametes may be shed through the excretory openings, or the swelling mass of eggs may split the body open, killing the parent and spilling the eggs into the environment.

Most insects have separate sexes with complex reproductive systems (FIGURE 46.7). In the male, sperm develop in a pair of testes and are conveyed along a coiled duct to two seminal vesicles, where they are stored. During mating, sperm are ejaculated into the female reproductive system. In the female, eggs develop in a pair of ovaries and are conveyed through ducts to the vagina, where fertilization occurs. In many species the female reproductive system includes a spermatheca, a sac in which sperm may be stored for a year or more.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 46-7. Insect reproductive anatomy.

The basic plan of all vertebrate reproductive systems is quite similar, but there are some important variations. In many nonmammalian vertebrates, the digestive, excretory, and reproductive systems have a common opening to the outside, the cloaca, which was probably present in the ancestors of all vertebrates. By contrast, most mammals lack a cloaca and have a separate opening for the digestive tract, and most female mammals have separate openings for the excretory and reproductive systems as well. The uterus of most vertebrates is partly or completely divided into two chambers. However, in humans and other mammals that produce only a few young at a time, as well as in birds and many snakes, the uterus is a single structure. Male reproductive systems differ mainly in the copulatory organs. Many nonmammalian vertebrates do not have a well-developed penis and simply evert the cloaca to ejaculate.




