
 Gases diffuse down pressure gradients in the lungs and other organs

For a gas, whether present in air or dissolved in water, diffusion depends on differences in a quantity called partial pressure. At sea level, the atmosphere exerts a total pressure of 760 mm Hg. This is a downward force equal to that exerted by a column of mercury 760 mm high. Since the atmosphere is 21%  oxygen (by volume), the partial pressure of oxygen (abbreviated PO2) is 0.21 &#160;X&#160; 760, or about 160 mm Hg. This is the portion of atmospheric pressure contributed by oxygen; hence the term partial pressure. The partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO2) at sea level is only 0.23 mm Hg. When water is exposed to air, the amount of a gas that dissolves in the water is proportional to its partial pressure in the air and its solubility in water. An equilibrium is eventually reached when gas molecules enter and leave the solution at the same rate. At this point, the gas is said to have the same partial pressure in solution as it does in the air. Thus, in a glass of water exposed to air at sea-level air pressure, the PO2 is 160 mm Hg, and the PCO2 is 0.23 mm Hg.

A gas will always diffuse from a region of higher partial pressure. Blood arriving at the lungs via the pulmonary arteries has a lower PO2 and a higher PCO2 than the air in the alveoli (FIGURE 42.27). As blood enters the alveolar capillaries, carbon dioxide diffuses from the blood to the air within the alveoli. Meanwhile, oxygen in the air dissolves in the fluid that coats the epithelium and diffuses across the surface and into the blood. By the time the blood leaves the lungs in the pulmonary veins, its PO2 has been raised and its PCO2 has been lowered. After returning to the heart, this blood is pumped through the systemic circuit. In the tissue capillaries, gradients of partial pressure favor the diffusion of oxygen out of the blood and carbon dioxide into the blood. This is because cellular respiration removes oxygen from and adds carbon dioxide to the interstitial fluid (again, by diffusion, from mitochondria in nearby cells). After the blood unloads oxygen and loads carbon dioxide, it is returned to the heart and pumped to the lungs again, where it exchanges gases with air in the alveoli.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-27. Loading and unloading of respiratory gases. The colored bars indicate the partial pressures of O2 (PO2) and CO2 (PCO2) (in mm Hg) in different locations. At each location, the respiratory gases diffuse down their partial pressure gradients.




