
 Field research helped Darwin frame his view of life

The Voyage of the Beagle

Darwin was 22 years old when he sailed from Great Britain aboard HMS Beagle in December 1831 (FIGURE 22.5). The primary mission of the voyage was to chart poorly known stretches of the South American coastline. While the ship's crew surveyed the coast, Darwin spent most of his time on shore, observing and collecting thousands of specimens of South American plants and animals. As the ship worked its way around the continent, Darwin observed the various adaptations of plants and animals that inhabited such diverse environments as the Brazilian jungles, the expansive grasslands of the Argentine pampas, the desolate lands of Tierra del Fuego near Antarctica, and the towering heights of the Andes Mountains.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 22-5. The Voyage of HMS Beagle. The two insets illustrate the ship and a marine iguana, one of the unique animals that evolved on the Gal&aacute;pagos Islands.

Darwin noted that plants and animals he studied had definite South American characteristics, very distinct from those of Europe. That in itself may not have been surprising. But Darwin also noted that the plants and animals in temperate regions of South America were more closely related to species living in tropical regions of that continent than to species in temperate regions of Europe. Furthermore, the South American fossils that Darwin found, though clearly different from modern species, were distinctly South American in their resemblance to the living plants and animals of that continent.

The geographic distribution of species interested Darwin. For example, he was curious about the fauna of the Gal&aacute;pagos, islands of relatively recent volcanic origin that lie on the equator about 900 km west of the South American coast (see FIGURE 22.5). Darwin did not grasp the full significance of the Gal&aacute;pagos animals until he studied his collections after returning to England in 1836. He then learned that most of the animal species on the Gal&aacute;pagos live nowhere else in the world, although they resemble species living on the South American mainland. It was as though the islands had been colonized by plants and animals that strayed from the South American mainland and then diversified on the different islands. Among the birds Darwin collected on the Gal&aacute;pagos were several types of finches that, although quite similar, seemed to be different species. Some were unique to individual islands, while other species were distributed on two or more islands that were close together.

Darwin read Lyell's Principles of Geology while on board the Beagle. Lyell's ideas, together with his own experiences on the Gal&aacute;pagos, had Darwin doubting the church's position that Earth was static and had been created only a few thousand years ago. By acknowledging that Earth was very old and constantly changing, Darwin took an important step toward recognizing that life on Earth had also evolved.

Darwin's Focus on Adaptation

Soon after returning to Great Britain in 1836, Darwin started reassessing all that he had observed during the voyage of the Beagle. He began to perceive the origin of new species and adaptation to the environment as closely related processes. Could a new species arise from an ancestral form by the gradual accumulation of adaptations to a different environment? From studies made years after Darwin's voyage, biologists have concluded that this is what happened to the Gal&aacute;pagos finches. Among the differences between the finches are their beaks, which are adapted to the specific foods available on their home islands (FIGURE 22.6). Darwin anticipated that explaining how such adaptations arise was essential to understanding evolution.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 22-6. Gal&aacute;pagos finches. The Gal&aacute;pagos Islands have a total of 14 species of closely related finches, some found only on a single island. The most striking difference among species is their beaks, which are adapted for specific diets. See also FIGURE 1.17b.

By the early 1840s, Darwin had worked out the major features of his theory of natural selection as the mechanism of evolution. However, he had not yet published his ideas. He was in poor health, and he rarely left home. Despite his reclusiveness, Darwin was not isolated from the scientific community. Already famous as a naturalist because of the letters and specimens he sent to Great Britain during the voyage of the Beagle, Darwin had frequent correspondence and visits from Lyell, Henslow, and other scientists.

In 1844, Darwin wrote a long essay on the origin of species and natural selection. However, Darwin was reluctant to introduce his theory publicly, apparently because he anticipated the uproar it would cause. Darwin asked his wife to publish his essay if he died before writing a more thorough dissertation on evolution. While he procrastinated, he continued to compile evidence in support of his theory. Lyell, not himself yet convinced of evolution, nevertheless advised Darwin to publish on the subject before someone else came to the same conclusions and published first.

In June 1858, Lyell's prediction came true. Darwin received a letter from Alfred Wallace (1823-1913), a young British naturalist working in the East Indies. The letter was accompanied by a manuscript in which Wallace developed a theory of natural selection essentially iden tical to Darwin's. Wallace asked Darwin to evaluate the paper and forward it to Lyell if it merited publication. Darwin complied, writing to Lyell: "Your words have come true with a vengeance&#160;...&#160;. I never saw a more striking coincidence&#160;...&#160;so all my originality, whatever it may amount to, will be smashed." Lyell and a colleague presented Wallace's paper, along with extracts from Darwin's unpublished 1844 essay, to the Linnaean Society of London on July 1, 1858. Darwin quickly finished The Origin of Species and published it the next year. Although Wallace wrote up his ideas for publication first, Darwin developed and supported the theory of natural selection so much more extensively that he is known as its main architect. And Darwin's notebooks prove that he formulated his theory of natural selection 15 years before reading Wallace's manuscript.

Within a decade, Darwin's book and its proponents had convinced the majority of biologists that biological diversity was the product of evolution. Darwin succeeded where previous evolutionists had failed, partly because science was beginning to shift away from natural theology, but mainly because he convinced his readers with immaculate logic and an avalanche of evidence in support of evolution.




