
 A molecule's biological function is related to its shape

A molecule has a characteristic size and shape. The precise shape of a molecule is usually very important to its function in the living cell.

A molecule consisting of two atoms, such as H2 or O2, is always linear, but molecules with more than two atoms have more complicated shapes. These shapes are determined by the positions of the atoms' orbitals. When an atom forms covalent bonds, the orbitals in its valence shell rearrange. For atoms with valence electrons in both s and p orbitals (see FIGURE 2.11), the single s and three p orbitals hybridize to form four new orbitals shaped like identical teardrops extending from the region of the atomic nucleus (FIGURE 2.17a). If we connect the larger ends of the teardrops with lines, we have the outline of a pyramidal shape called a tetrahedron.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 2-17. Molecular shapes due to hybrid orbitals. (a) The single s and three p orbitals of a valence shell involved in covalent bonding combine to form four teardrop-shaped hybrid orbitals. These orbitals extend to the four corners of an imaginary tetrahedron (outlined in magenta). (b) Because of the positions of the hybrid orbitals, the two covalent bonds of water are angled at 104.5&#176;. This is seen most clearly in the ball-and-stick model. The space-filling model comes closer to the actual shape of the molecule. (c) The hydrogens of methane occupy all four corners of the tetrahedron, giving methane a tetrahedral shape.

For the water molecule (H2O), two of the hybrid orbitals in the oxygen atom's valence shell are shared with hydrogen atoms (FIGURE 2.17b). The result is a molecule shaped roughly like a V, its two covalent bonds spread apart at an angle of 104.5&#176;.

The methane molecule (CH4) has the shape of a completed tetrahedron, because all four hybrid orbitals of carbon are shared (FIGURE 2.17c). The nucleus of the carbon is at the center, with its four covalent bonds radiating to hydrogen nuclei at the corners of the tetrahedron. Larger molecules containing multiple carbon atoms, including many of the molecules that make up living matter, have more complex overall shapes. However, the tetrahedral shape of a carbon atom bonded to four other atoms is often a repeating motif within such molecules.

Molecular shape is crucial in biology because it determines how most biological molecules recognize and respond to one another. For instance, in the chemical signaling example mentioned earlier, the signal molecules released by the transmitting brain cell have a unique shape that specifically fits together with the shape of the receptor molecules on the surface of the receiving cell, much as a key fits into a lock (FIGURE 2.18). This complementarity of shape aids the formation of weak bonds between the two molecules. The attachment of the signal molecule to the receptor molecule stimulates activity in the receptor cell. Molecules with shapes similar to those of the brain's signal molecules can affect mood and pain perception. Morphine, heroin, and other opiate drugs, for example, mimic natural signal molecules called endorphins (FIGURE 2.19). These drugs produce euphoria and relieve pain by binding to endorphin receptors in the brain. The role of molecular shape in brain chemistry is an example of the relationship of structure to function, one of biology's unifying themes.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 2-18. Molecular shape and brain chemistry. One nerve cell in the brain signals another by releasing signal molecules into the gap between the cells. The shape of the signal molecules is complementary to the shape of receptor molecules located on the surface of the receiving cell. The actual molecules have much more complex shapes than represented here.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 2-19. A molecular mimic. Morphine affects pain perception and emotional state by mimicking the brain's natural endorphins. The boxed portion of the endorphin molecule is recognized by receptor molecules on target cells in the brain. The boxed portion of the morphine molecule, an opiate drug, is a close match.




