
 The debate continues with the rivet and redundancy models

The individualistic hypothesis is generally accepted by plant ecologists today, but further debate arises in the application of these ideas to the animals in a community. In 1981, Paul and Anne Ehrlich, of Stanford University, suggested that species in a community are like the rivets in the wings of airplanes: Not all the rivets are required to hold the wing together, but if someone started taking out the rivets one by one, we would become concerned about flying in that airplane. The rivet model of communities is a reincarnation of the interactive model of Clements that was suggested for plant communities. The rivet model suggests that most of the species in a community are associated tightly with other species in a web of life. Thus, reducing or increasing the abundance of one species in a community affects many other species.

In 1992, Brian Walker suggested an opposing view of communities, the redundancy model. According to this model, most of the species in a community are not tightly associated with one another, and the web of life is very loose. An increase or decrease in one species in a community has little effect on other species, which operate independently, just as suggested by Gleason 80 years before in his individualistic model of the plant community. Species within a community are redundant. For example, if one predator disappears, another predatory species in the community will usually take its place as a consumer of specific prey. If one pollinator ceases to visit a particular species of flowering plant because the pollinator has disappeared from the area, another pollinator species will do the job.

No matter which (if either) of these two models is correct, it is important to study species relationships in communities. Species in communities do interact, even if some of these interactions are not imperative for the species. It is also important to remember that these two models represent extremes, although most communities actually lie somewhere in the middle. To answer some key questions, we need to determine how species interact in communities and how tight these associations are. For example, what happens to a community when one species is lost or is replaced with a species introduced by humans? Such questions are important because they underlie many of our environmental problems today.




