
 Humans use prokaryotes in research and technology

Humans have learned many ways of exploiting the diverse metabolic capabilities of prokaryotes, both for scientific research and for practical purposes. Much of what we know about metabolism and molecular biology has been learned in laboratories using prokaryotes as relatively simple model systems. In fact, E. coli, the prokaryotic "white rat" of so many research labs, is the best understood of all organisms. And we are just beginning to explore the great potential prokaryotes have for helping us solve some of our environmental problems.

The use of organisms to remove pollutants from water, air, and soil is called bioremediation. The most familiar example of bioremediation is the use of prokaryotic decomposers to treat our sewage. Raw sewage is first passed through a series of screens and shredders, and solid matter is allowed to settle out from the liquid waste. This solid matter, called sludge, is then gradually added to a culture of anaerobic prokaryotes, including both bacteria and archaea. The microbes decompose the organic matter in the sludge, converting it to material that can be used as landfill or fertilizer after chemical sterilization. Liquid wastes are treated separately from the sludge (FIGURE 27.18). In other examples of bioremediation, soil bacteria called pseudomonads (proteobacteria) are used to decompose petroleum compounds on beaches and other sites of oil spills and to decompose a variety of synthetic compounds, such as pesticides (FIGURE 27.19). Genetic engineers are improving the bioremediation powers of certain prokaryotes.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 27-18. Putting prokaryotes to work in sewage treatment facilities. This is a trickling filter system, one type of mechanism for treating liquid wastes after sludge is removed. The long horizontal pipes rotate slowly, spraying liquid wastes through the air onto a thick bed of rocks. Bacteria and fungi growing on the rocks remove much of the organic material dissolved in the waste. Outflow from the rock bed is sterilized and then released, usually into a river or ocean.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 27-19. Bioremediation for an oil spill. A worker is spraying fertilizers on an oil-soaked beach in Alaska. The fertilizers stimulate growth of indigenous bacteria that can initiate the breakdown of the oil--in some cases, speeding the natural process of breakdown some fivefold. This technique is the fastest and least expensive way yet devised to clean up oil spills on beaches.

Humans also put bacteria to work as metabolic "factories" for commercial products. The chemical industry grows immense cultures of bacteria that produce acetone, butanol, and several other products. Pharmaceutical companies culture bacteria that make vitamins and antibiotics. Bacteria containing magnetic particles may soon become a commercial source for manufacturing magnetic tapes and other recording devices. The food industry uses bacteria to convert milk to yogurt and various kinds of cheese. And DNA technology has opened a new era in the commercial use of prokaryotes (see Chapter 20).

In this chapter, we have surveyed the prokaryotes and traced their history. On an ancient Earth inhabited only by prokaryotes, all the diverse forms of nutrition and metabolism evolved. Most subsequent evolutionary breakthroughs were structural rather than metabolic. The most significant development was the origin of eukaryotic cells from prokaryotic ancestors, which we will explore in the next chapter.




