
 Abiotic synthesis of organic monomers is a testable hypothesis

In the 1920s, A. I. Oparin, of Russia, and J. B. S. Haldane, of Great Britain, independently postulated that conditions on the primitive Earth favored chemical reactions that synthesized organic compounds from inorganic precursors present in the early atmosphere and seas. This cannot happen in the modern world, Oparin and Haldane reasoned, because the present atmosphere is rich in oxygen produced by photosynthetic life. The oxidizing atmosphere of today is not conducive to the spontaneous synthesis of complex molecules because the oxygen attacks chemical bonds, extracting electrons. Before oxygen-producing photosynthesis, Earth had a much less oxidizing atmosphere, derived mainly from volcanic vapors. Such a reducing (electron-adding) atmosphere would have enhanced the joining of simple molecules to form more complex ones. Even with a reducing atmosphere, making organic molecules would require considerable energy, which was probably provided by lightning and the intense UV radiation that penetrated the primitive atmosphere. The modern atmosphere has a layer of ozone produced from oxygen, and this ozone shield screens out most UV radiation. There is also evidence that young suns emit more UV radiation than older suns. Oparin and Haldane envisioned an ancient world with the chemical conditions and energy resources needed for the abiotic synthesis of organic molecules.

In 1953, Stanley Miller and Harold Urey tested the Oparin-Haldane hypothesis by creating, in the laboratory, conditions comparable to those that scientists had postulated for the early Earth. Their apparatus produced a variety of amino acids and other organic compounds found in living organisms today (FIGURE 26.10; also see FIGURE 4.1).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 26-10. The Miller-Urey experiment. A warmed flask of water simulated the primeval sea. The "atmosphere" consisted of H2O, H2, CH4, and NH3. Sparks were discharged in the synthetic atmosphere to mimic lightning. A condenser cooled the atmosphere, raining water and any dissolved compounds back to the miniature sea. As material circulated through the apparatus, the solution in the flask changed from clear to murky brown. After one week, Miller and Urey analyzed the contents of the solution and found a variety of organic compounds, including some of the amino acids that make up the proteins of organisms.

The atmosphere in the Miller-Urey model was made up of H2O, H2, CH4 (methane), and NH3 (ammonia), the gases that researchers in the 1950s believed prevailed in the ancient world. This atmosphere was probably more strongly reducing than the actual atmosphere of early Earth. Modern volcanoes emit CO, CO2, N2, and water vapor, and it is likely that these gases were abundant in the ancient atmosphere. Hydrogen gas was probably not a major component, and traces of O2 may even have been present, formed from reactions among other gases as they baked under the powerful UV radiation. Many laboratories have repeated the Miller experiment using a variety of recipes for the atmosphere. Abiotic synthesis of organic compounds occurred in these modified models, although yields were generally smaller than in the original experiment.

The Miller-Urey experiments still stimulate debate on the origin of Earth's early stockpile of organic ingredients. Today, one line of research focuses on where chemicals needed for organic syntheses came from and where the reactions most likely occurred. Some scientists now doubt that the early atmosphere played a significant role in early chemical reactions. Instead, submerged volcanoes and deep-sea vents--gaps in Earth's crust where hot water and minerals gush into deep oceans--may have provided the essential resources. Evidence is also building that life could have begun in a much simpler chemical environment than formerly thought. For instance, the first cells may have used inorganic sulfur and iron compounds as energy sources to make their own ATP instead of taking it up from their surroundings.

It is also plausible that some organic compounds reached Earth from space. In 2000, Indian scientists reported computer models showing how molecules such as adenine, an ingredient of DNA, could form by reactions of cyanide in the clouds of gas between stars. These simulations would explain why some meteorites that have crashed to Earth contain organic molecules. But whether the primordial Earth was stocked with organic monomers made here or elsewhere, the key point is that the molecular ingredients of life were probably present very early.




