
 Oceans and lakes don't freeze solid because ice floats

Water is one of the few substances that are less dense as a solid than as a liquid. In other words, ice floats. While other materials contract when they solidify, water expands. The cause of this exotic behavior is, once again, hydrogen bonding. At temperatures above 4&#176;C, water behaves like other liquids, expanding as it warms and contracting as it cools. Water begins to freeze when its molecules are no longer moving vigorously enough to break their hydrogen bonds. As the temperature reaches 0&#176;C, the water becomes locked into a crystalline lattice, each water molecule bonded to the maximum of four partners (FIGURE 3.5). The hydrogen bonds keep the molecules at "arm's length," far enough apart to make ice about 10% less dense (10% fewer molecules for the same volume) than liquid water at 4&#176;C. When ice absorbs enough heat for its temperature to rise above 0&#176;C, hydrogen bonds between molecules are disrupted. As the crystal collapses, the ice melts, and molecules are free to slip closer together. Water reaches its greatest density at 4&#176;C and then begins to expand as the molecules move faster. Keep in mind, however, that even in liquid water, many of the molecules are connected by hydrogen bonds, though only transiently: The hydrogen bonds are constantly breaking and reforming.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 3-5. The structure of ice. In ice, each molecule is hydrogen-bonded to four neighbors in a three-dimensional crystal. Because the crystal is spacious, ice has fewer molecules than an equal volume of liquid water. In other words, ice is less dense than liquid water.

The ability of ice to float because of the expansion of water as it solidifies is an important factor in the fitness of the environment. If ice sank, then eventually all ponds, lakes, and even oceans would freeze solid, making life as we know it impossible on Earth. During summer, only the upper few inches of the ocean would thaw. Instead, when a deep body of water cools, the floating ice insulates the liquid water below, preventing it from freezing and allowing life to exist under the frozen surface (FIGURE 3.6).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 3-6. Floating ice and the fitness of the environment. Floating ice becomes a barrier that protects the liquid water below from the colder air. The invertebrates shown here are called krill; they were photographed beneath the antarctic ice.




