
 The life cycle of a pine demonstrates the key reproductive adaptations of seed plants

You learned earlier in the chapter that the evolution of seed plants added three key terrestrial adaptations in reproduction: the increasing dominance of the sporophyte generation; the advent of the seed as a resistant, dispersible stage in the life cycle; and the evolution of pollen as an airborne agent that brings gametes together. Examining the life cycle of a pine, one of the most familiar of conifers and gymnosperms, will reinforce your understanding of these adaptations (FIGURE 30.9, p. 605).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 30-9. The life cycle of a pine. 
			  
		 Trees (sporophytes) of most species bear both pollen cones and ovulate cones. 
			  
		 A pollen cone contains hundreds of microsporangia held in small reproductive leaves, or sporophylls. Cells in the micro sporangia undergo meiosis, giving rise to haploid microspores that develop into pollen grains (immature male gametophytes). 
			  
		 An ovulate cone consists of many scales, each with two ovules. Each ovule includes a megasporangium. 
			  
		 During pollination, windblown pollen falls on the ovulate cone and is drawn into the ovule through the micropyle. The pollen grain germinates in the ovule, forming a pollen tube that begins to digest its way through the megasporangium. Fertilization usually occurs more than a year after pollination. During that year, 
			  
		 a megaspore mother cell undergoes meiosis to produce four haploid cells. One of these cells survives as a megaspore, which grows and divides repeatedly, giving rise to the immature female gametophyte. Notice that the gametophyte develops within the spore. 
			  
		 Two or three archegonia, each with an egg, then develop within the gametophyte. 
			  
		 By the time eggs are ready to be fertilized, two sperm cells have developed in the male gametophyte (pollen grain), and the pollen tube has extended to the female gametophyte. Fertilization occurs when one of the sperm nuclei, injected into an egg cell by the pollen tube, unites with the egg nucleus. All the eggs in an ovule may be fertilized, but usually only one zygote develops into an embryo. 
			  
		 The pine embryo, the new sporophyte, has a rudimentary root and several embryonic leaves. A food supply, consisting of the female gametophyte, surrounds and nourishes the embryo. The ovule has developed into a pine seed, which consists of an embryo (new sporophyte), its food supply (derived from gametophyte tissue), and a surrounding seed coat derived from the integuments of the parent tree (parent sporophyte). Notice that three plant generations--one gametophyte and two sporophyte generations--are represented in a gymnosperm seed.

The pine tree is a sporophyte. Its sporangia are located on scalelike sporophylls that are packed densely in structures called cones. The female gametophyte generation develops from haploid spores that are retained within the sporangia. Conifers, like all seed plants, are heterosporous; male and female gametophytes develop from different types of spores produced by separate cones (FIGURE 30.10, p. 606). Each tree usually has both types of cones. Small pollen cones produce microspores that develop into the male gametophytes, or pollen grains. Larger ovulate cones make megaspores that develop into female gametophytes. From the time young cones appear on the tree, it takes nearly three years to produce the male and female gametophytes, bring them together via pollination, and form mature seeds from the fertilized ovules. The scales of the ovulate cone then separate, and the seeds travel on the wind. A seed that lands in a habitable place germinates, its embryo emerging as a pine seedling.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 30-10. A closer look at pine cones (Pinus sp.).




