
 Extranuclear genes exhibit a non-Mendelian pattern of inheritance

Although our focus in this chapter has been on the chromosomal basis of inheritance, we end with an important amendment: Not all of a eukaryotic cell's genes are located on nuclear chromosomes, or even in the nucleus. Extranuclear genes are found on small circles of DNA in mitochondria and in plants' plastids, including chloroplasts. Both mitochondria and plastids reproduce themselves and transmit their genes to daughter organelles. These cytoplasmic genes do not display Mendelian inheritance because they are not distributed to offspring according to the same rules that direct the distribution of nuclear chromosomes during meiosis.

Cytoplasmic genes were first observed in plants. In 1909, Karl Correns studied the inheritance of yellow or white patches on the leaves of an otherwise green plant. He found that the coloration of the offspring was determined only by the maternal parent (the source of seeds that germinate to give rise to the offspring) and not by the paternal parent (the pollen source). Subsequent research has shown that such coloration patterns are due to genes in the plastids that control pigmentation. In most plants, a zygote receives all its plastids from the cytoplasm of the ovum and none from pollen. Thus, as the zygote of these plants develops, its pattern of leaf coloration depends only on maternal plastid genes (FIGURE 15.16).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 15-16. Cytoplasmic inheritance in tomato leaves. Variegated (striped or spotted) leaves result from genes located in the plastids rather than on the nuclear chromosomes of plant cells. Because only the ovum contributes plastids to a plant zygote, all plastid genes are inherited from the maternal parent.

Maternal inheritance is also the rule for the mitochondrial genes in mammals, because the mitochondria passed on by the zygote all come from the cytoplasm of the ovum. In recent years, scientists have learned that mutations in mitochondrial DNA cause a number of rare human disorders. The products of most mitochondrial genes help make up the protein complexes of the electron transport chain and ATP synthase (see Chapter 9). Defects in one or more of these proteins therefore reduce the amount of ATP the cell can make. The parts of the body most susceptible to energy deprivation are the nervous system and the muscles, and most mitochondrial diseases affect these systems. For example, a person with the disease called mitochondrial myopathy suffers weakness, intolerance of exercise, and muscle deterioration.

In addition to the rare diseases clearly caused by defects in mitochondrial DNA, mitochondrial mutations inherited from a person's mother may contribute to at least some cases of diabetes and heart disease, as well as to other disorders that commonly debilitate the elderly, such as Alzheimer's disease. In the course of a lifetime, new mutations gradually accumulate in our mitochondrial DNA, and some researchers believe that these play a role in the normal aging process.

Wherever genes are located in the cell--nucleus or cytoplasm--their inheritance depends on the precise replication of DNA, the genetic material. In the next chapter, you will learn how this molecular reproduction occurs.




