
 Many invertebrates have gravity sensors and are sound-sensitive

Most invertebrates have sensory organs called statocysts that contain mechanoreceptors and function in their sense of equilibrium (FIGURE 49.21). A common type of statocyst has a layer of hair cells surrounding a chamber containing statoliths, which are grains of sand or other dense granules. Gravity causes the statoliths to settle to the low point within the chamber, stimulating hair cells in that location. This is similar to how the saccule and utricle function in vertebrates, and indeed these structures in the vertebrate inner ear are considered to be specialized types of statocysts. The statocysts of invertebrates have various locations. For example, many jellies have statocysts at the fringe of the "bell," giving the animals an indication of body position. Lobsters and crayfish have statocysts near the bases of their antennules. Crayfish have been tricked into swimming upside down in experiments in which the statoliths were replaced with metal shavings that could be pulled to the upper end of the statocysts with magnets.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 49-21. The statocyst of an invertebrate. The settling of statoliths to the low point within the chamber bends cilia on receptor cells in that location, providing the brain with information about the position of the body.

Many invertebrates demonstrate a general sensitivity to sound, although structures specialized for hearing seem to be less widespread than gravity sensors. Hearing structures have been most extensively studied in terrestrial insects.

Many (perhaps most) insects have body hairs that vibrate in response to sound waves. Hairs of different stiffness and length vibrate at different frequencies. The hairs are commonly tuned to frequencies of sounds produced by other organisms. A male mosquito locates a mate by means of fine hairs on his antennae. The hairs vibrate in a specific way in response to the hum produced by the beating wings of flying females. A tuning fork that vibrates at the same frequency as a female mosquito's wings will also attract males. Some caterpillars (larval moths and butterflies) have vibrating body hairs that detect the buzzing wings of predatory wasps, warning the caterpillars of danger. Many insects also have localized "ears" (FIGURE 49.22). A tympanic membrane (eardrum) is stretched over an internal air chamber. Sound waves vibrate the tympanic membrane, stimulating receptor cells attached to the inside of the membrane and resulting in nerve impulses that are transmitted to the brain. Some moths can hear notes of such high pitch that they detect the sounds bats produce for sonar, and perception of these sounds triggers the moth's escape maneuver, as mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 49-22. An insect ear. The tympanic membrane, this one on the front leg of a cricket, vibrates in response to sound waves (SEM). The vibrations stimulate mechanoreceptor cells attached to the inside of the tympanic membrane.




