
 Tetrapods evolved from specialized fishes that inhabited shallow water

Amphibians were the first tetrapods to spend a substantial portion of their time on land. But if we define tetrapods as vertebrates that have relatively sturdy, skeleton-supported legs instead of paired fins, then the first animals to qualify were highly specialized fishes that lived in shallow aquatic habitats (FIGURE 34.15). And for the name tetrapod to identify a monophyletic lineage (clade), with legs as the key derived homology, then we must include these ancestral fishes.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-15. The origin of tetrapods. Many of the intermediate fossils on which this cladogram is based have been discovered only recently. The bars on the branches place the known fossils in time (arrows indicate lineages that extend to today). In this artist's recreation of the extinct animals, the body forms are based on fossilized skeletons, but the colors are fanciful artistic touches.

During the Devonian period, a diversity of plants and arthropods already inhabited the land, and the evolution of trees and other large vegetation was transforming these terrestrial ecosystems. Plants rooted at the margins of ponds and swamps and organic material that dropped into the water from the terrestrial ecosystems also created new living conditions and new food supplies for fishes living near water's edge. A diversity of fishes resembling modern lobe-fins and lungfishes had already evolved. Both modern lungfishes and frogs breathe air by a mechanism called buccal pumping rather than using the rib cage, as we do. In buccal breathing, the animal drops the floor of the mouth, which sucks air in, then closes the mouth and raises the floor, forcing air into the lungs. In addition to lungs that supplemented gills for gas exchange at water's edge, leglike appendages were probably better equipment than fins for paddling and crawling through the dense vegetation in shallow water. Thus, the lungs and appendages of tetrapods evolved in certain specialized fishes tens of millions of years before this equipment was used by the earliest amphibians to live on land.

The fossil record chronicles this transition, over a 50-million-year period from 400 to 350 million years ago, from sturdy-finned fishes such as Eusthenopteron to tetrapod fishes to amphibians (see FIGURE 34.15). For example, fossils of Acanthostega have the bony supports of gills but also have four appendages with the same basic skeletal elements as the walking limbs of amphibians, reptiles, and mammals, including humans (FIGURE 34.16). Though Acanthostega was aquatic--it was a fish--it represents a period of vertebrate evolution when adaptations that equipped certain fishes for shallow water preadapted one lineage of those fishes for a gradual transition to spending more and more time walking and breathing on the terrestrial side of water's edge.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-16. Skeleton of Acanthostega, a Devonian tetrapod fish. This vertebrate was a fish-- an aquatic vertebrate with gills as an adult-- but its appendages had the tetrapod skeletal structure. Early amphibians had very similar skeletons.

As the earliest terrestrial tetrapods, amphibians benefited from an abundance of food and relatively little competition. An adaptive radiation gave rise to a great diversity of amphibians during the early Carboniferous period, and in fact, the Carboniferous is sometimes called the "age of amphibians." Amphibians began to decline in numbers and diversity during the late Carboniferous. As the Mesozoic era dawned with the Triassic period, about 245 million years ago, most surviving lineages of amphibians resembled modern species.




