
 Allopatric speciation: Geographic barriers can lead to the origin of species

Conditions for Allopatric Speciation

Several geologic processes can fragment a population into two or more isolated populations. A mountain range may emerge and gradually split a population of organisms that can inhabit only lowlands. A land bridge, such as the Isthmus of Panama, may form and separate the marine life on either side. A large lake may subside until there are several smaller lakes with their populations now isolated. Even without such geologic remodeling, geographic isolation and allopatric speciation can occur if individuals colonize a new, geographically remote area and become isolated from the parent population. An example is the speciation that occurred on the Gal&aacute;pagos Islands following colonization by mainland organisms.

How formidable must a geographic barrier be to keep allopatric populations apart? The answer depends on the ability of the organisms to move about. Birds, mountain lions, and coyotes can cross mountain ranges, rivers, and canyons. Nor do such barriers hinder the windblown pollen of pine trees, and the seeds of many plants may be carried back and forth on animals. In contrast, small rodents may find a deep canyon or a wide river a formidable barrier (FIGURE 24.7).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 24-7. Allopatric speciation of squirrels in the Grand Canyon. Two species of antelope squirrels inhabit opposite rims of the Grand Canyon. On the south rim is Harris's antelope squirrel (Ammospermophilus harrisi). Just a few miles away on the north rim is the closely related white-tailed antelope squirrel (Ammospermophilis leucurus). Birds and other organisms that can disperse easily across the canyon have not diverged into different species on opposite rims.

The likelihood of allopatric speciation increases when a population is both small and isolated. A small, isolated population is more likely than a large population to have its gene pool changed substantially by genetic drift and natural selection. For example, in less than 2 million years, small populations of stray animals and plants from the South American mainland that managed to colonize the Gal&aacute;pagos Islands gave rise to all the new species that now inhabit the islands. But for each small, isolated population that becomes a new species, many more simply perish in their new environment. Life on the frontier is harsh, and most pioneer populations probably become extinct.

A key question about allopatric populations is whether they have become different enough that they can no longer interbreed and produce fertile offspring if they come back into contact (FIGURE 24.8). In some cases, researchers evaluate whether speciation has occurred by artificially bringing together members of separated populations in a laboratory setting. In other cases, biologists can investigate allopatric speciation where separated populations have come back into contact naturally.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 24-8. Has speciation occurred during geographic isolation?

Ring Species: Allopatric Speciation in Progress?

Some species have geographic distributions that provide evolutionary biologists with examples of what seem to be populations at various stages in their gradual divergence from common ancestors. Consider a so-called ring species, which is distributed around some geographic barrier, with the populations that have diverged the most in their evolution eventually meeting where the ring closes. FIGURE 24.9 illustrates populations of a North American salamander, Ensatina eschscholtzii. The species probably expanded southward into California from Oregon. The California population eventually split into a coastal population and an inland one, giving rise to two separate chains of interbreeding populations. One chain extends down the coastal mountains and one extends down the inland mountains (Sierra Nevada range). The dual chains of salamander populations gradually formed a ring around California's central valley (the San Joaquin Valley). Salamanders of the different populations contrast in coloration, and researchers have demonstrated that the coastal and inland populations exhibit more and more genetic differences the farther south the comparison is made.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 24-9. Ensatina eschscholtzii, a ring species. The gap in the ring in southern California indicates that researchers have not yet collected salamanders in that desert location, but genetic analysis indicates a close relationship between the large-blotched salamander and inland populations at the southern end of the Sierra Nevada mountains.

In the northern and middle portions of the ring, the salamander populations interbreed as a single species (as defined by the biological species concept). About halfway down the ring, the coastal and inland gene pools occasionally "leak" across the central valley as members of the two populations interbreed. But near the ring's southern end in San Diego County, no hybridization occurs in some of the locales where the ranges of coastal and inland populations overlap. Based on the criterion of reproductive isolation, it is legitimate to designate the two southern populations as separate species.

Adaptive Radiation on Island Chains

Islands are living laboratories for the study of speciation. Flurries of allopatric speciation have occurred on island chains where organisms that have strayed or become passively dispersed from their parent populations have founded new populations that evolved in isolation (FIGURE 24.10). The many indigenous species of the Gal&aacute;pagos descended from stragglers that floated, flew, or were blown over the sea from the South American mainland. For example, consider the Gal&aacute;pagos finches. A single dispersal event may have seeded one island with a small population of the ancestral finch, which gave rise to a new species. Later, a few individuals of this island species may have reached neighboring islands, where geographic isolation permitted additional speciation episodes. After diverging on one of these other islands, a new species could recolonize the island from which its founding population emigrated and coexist there with its parent species or form still another species. Multiple colonizations by species from neighboring islands would eventually lead to the coexistence of several species on each island. The islands are far enough apart to permit populations to evolve in isolation, but close enough together for occasional dispersion events to occur. Such evolution of many diversely adapted species from a common ancestor is called adaptive radiation (FIGURE 24.11).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 24-10. Long-distance dispersal Seeds of a plant named Pisonia cling like Velcro&#174; to this black noddy tern as the migratory seabird walks on an island off the coast of Australia. This is one mechanism that can transport terrestrial organisms to isolated islands.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 24-11. A model for adaptive radiation on island chains.

The Hawaiian Archipelago is one of the world's great showcases of evolution (see FIGURE 22.16). The volcanic islands are about 3,500 km from the nearest continent. They become progressively younger to the southeast, terminating with the youngest and largest island, Hawaii, which is less than a million years old and still has active volcanoes. Each island was born naked and was gradually populated by species derived from strays that rode the ocean currents and winds either from distant islands and continents or from older islands of the archipelago itself. The physical diversity of each island, including a range of altitudes and extensive differences in rainfall, provides many environmental opportunities for evolutionary divergence by natural selection. Multiple invasions and allopatric speciations have ignited an explosion of adaptive radiation; most of the thousands of species of plants and animals that now inhabit the islands are found nowhere else in the world. In contrast, there are no indigenous species on the Florida Keys. Apparently, those islands are so close to the mainland that founding populations are not sufficiently sequestered for their gene pools to become isolated from the steady stream of immigrants from the parent populations on the mainland.

How Do Reproductive Barriers Evolve?

This is a good time to address two potential misunderstandings about allopatric speciation. First, it is important to understand that geographic isolation, while obviously preventing interbreeding between allopatric populations, does not qualify as reproductive isolation in the biological sense. The reproductive barriers relevant to the biological species concept are intrinsic to the organisms themselves and prevent interbreeding even in the absence of geographic isolation (see FIGURE 24.5 to review reproductive barriers). Second, it is important to realize that speciation is not due to some drive to erect reproductive barriers around a population. In most cases, reproductive barriers are probably coincidental to changes in gene pools due to natural selection and genetic drift as allopatric populations evolve separately. Let's examine a couple of examples.

Example of Evolution of a Prezygotic Barrier. Diane Dodd, of Yale University, designed laboratory experiments to test the hypothesis that reproductive barriers between allopatric populations can evolve as a by-product of the populations' adaptive divergence in different environments. She divided a sample of fruit flies (Drosophila pseudoobscura) into several laboratory populations that were then cultured for several generations on different nutrient sources. Some populations were nourished with a starch medium, while others were nourished with a maltose (malt sugar) medium (FIGURE 24.12). Acting over several generations, natural selection favored those individuals that were best suited to the available nutrient; populations reared on starch improved in their efficiency at starch digestion, while the "maltose" populations improved in their efficiency at malt sugar digestion.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 24-12. Evolution of reproductive isolation in lab populations of Drosophila.

After the two types of fly populations diverged in their evolution for several generations, Dodd combined flies from various populations in mate-choice experiments. Female "maltose flies" were more likely to mate with male maltose flies than with male "starch flies," even if the maltose flies came from a different maltose fly population. The female starch flies also seemed to discriminate in favor of other starch flies as mates. This is an example of a prezygotic barrier--in this case, a behavioral obstacle to interbreeding. The reproductive barrier was not absolute--some mating between maltose flies and starch flies did occur--but reproductive isolation was apparently well under way after several generations of evolutionary divergence.

Why would a reproductive barrier between two populations be a consequence of their divergent adaptation to different environments? Specifically, how could adaptation to a certain diet affect mate choice? One hypothesis is based on pleiotropy, where one allele has multiple effects on phenotype--in this case affecting both nutrient digestion and mate choice (see Chapter 14). Mating in fruit flies follows an elaborate courtship ritual that includes a song produced by the buzzing of the wings, a dance with specific "steps," and detection of specific odors emitted from the potential mate's cuticle, the hard covering of insects. Perhaps the same allele(s) that enhances digestion of a certain carbohydrate also affects the chemical composition of the cuticle and determines which of these "bouquet" molecules function in mate recognition. How could you test this hypothesis?

Example of Evolution of a Postzygotic Barrier.Robert Vickery, of the University of Utah, tested the ability of plants from different populations of monkey flower (Mimulus glabratus) to interbreed. (The plant is named for its flower, which resembles a monkey's face.) The species has a very large range that extends throughout the Americas. Vickery imported Mimulus plants from different regions and cross-pollinated them in his greenhouse. He then planted the seeds of the hybrids to see if they developed into fertile plants. Most of the offspring were fertile when the cross was between plants from nearby populations--say, between Wisconsin and Michigan Mimulus. But the proportion of fertile offspring dropped off when Vickery crossed plants from more distant populations. In fact, the offspring of hybrids from crosses between plants from Wisconsin and Mexico were almost all sterile. Note that this is a postzygotic barrier (hybrid breakdown; see FIGURE 24.5).

Again, it is important to dispel the notion that such a reproductive barrier evolves because of some kind of drive toward speciation. In fact, natural selection probably maintains reproductive compatibility between neighboring Mimulus populations because hybridization between these populations occurs often enough in nature that alleles hampering reproductive success of the hybrids would be eliminated from the gene pool. But a Wisconsin monkey flower would never hybridize naturally with one from Mexico, and thus there is no selection pressure keeping the genomes of such distant populations compatible enough for successful interbreeding. It's not that selection favors a reproductive barrier between allopatric populations, but that there is no longer any advantage to the absence of such barriers.

Summary of Allopatric Speciation

In allopatric speciation, a new species forms while geographically isolated from its ancestor. As the isolated population's gene pool evolves by genetic drift and natural selection, reproductive isolation from the ancestral species may evolve as a by-product of the genetic change. Such reproductive barriers prevent interbreeding with the ancestor, even if the populations come back into contact. We have examined four examples of how biologists are dissecting the process of allopatric speciation: the evolutionary divergence of populations of a ring species (the salamander Ensatina eschscholtzii); the adaptive radiation of island species; the origin of a prezygotic barrier to interbreeding in lab populations of the fruit fly Drosophila pseudoobscura; and the origin of a postzygotic barrier between distant populations of the monkey flower Mimulus glabratus. Let's turn next to mechanisms that can produce a new species without geographic isolation from its ancestor.




