
 The chromosomal basis of sex varies with the organism

Our sex is one of our more obvious phenotypic characters. Although the anatomical and physiological differences between women and men are numerous, the chromosomal basis of sex is rather simple. In humans and other mammals, as in fruit flies, there are two varieties of sex chromosomes, designated X and Y. A person who inherits two X chromosomes, one from each parent, usually develops as a female. A male usually develops from a zygote containing one X chromosome and one Y chromosome (see FIGURE 15.8a and the karyotype in FIGURE 13.3). When meiosis occurs in the testis, the X and Y chromosomes behave like homologous chromosomes, although they are only partially homologous and undergo very little crossing over with each other.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 15-8. Some chromosomal systems of sex determination. Numerals indicate the number of autosomes, the nonsex chromo-somes. In Drosophila, males are XY, but sex is actually determined by the number of X chromosomes, as in part b.

In both testes and ovaries, the two sex chromosomes segregate during meiosis, and each gamete receives one. Each ovum contains one X chromosome. In contrast, sperm fall into two categories: Half the sperm cells a male produces contain an X chromosome, and half contain a Y chromosome. We can trace the sex of each offspring to the moment of conception: If a sperm cell bearing an X chromosome happens to fertilize an ovum, the zygote is XX; if a sperm cell containing a Y chromosome fertilizes an ovum, the zygote is XY. Sex is a matter of chance--a fifty-fifty chance. FIGURE 15.8 compares this X-Y system of mammals to chromosomal systems of sex determination in other animal groups.

In humans, the anatomical signs of sex begin to emerge when the embryo is about two months old. Before then, the rudiments of the gonads are generic--they can develop into either ovaries or testes, depending on hormonal conditions within the embryo. Which of these two possibilities occurs depends on whether or not a Y chromosome is present. In 1990, a British research team identified a gene required for the development of testes. They named the gene SRY, for sex-determining region of Y. In the absence of SRY, the gonads develop into ovaries. The researchers emphasized that the presence (or absence) of SRY is just a trigger. The biochemical, physiological, and anatomical features of sex are complex, and many genes are involved in their development. SRY codes for a protein that regulates many other genes. Recently, researchers have identified a number of additional genes on the Y chromosome that are required for normal testis functioning. In the absence of these genes, an XY individual is male but does not produce normal sperm.




