
 The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) clones DNA entirely in vitro

DNA cloning in cells remains the best method for preparing large quantities of a particular gene or other DNA sequence. However, when the source of DNA is scanty or impure, a method called PCR is quicker and more selective. PCR, the polymerase chain reaction, is a technique by which any piece of DNA can be quickly amplified (copied many times) without using cells (FIGURE 20.7). The DNA is incubated in a test tube with a special kind of DNA polymerase, a supply of nucleotides, and short pieces of synthetic single-stranded DNA that serve as primers for DNA synthesis. (Recall from FIGURE 16.14 that DNA polymerases need primers because they can add nucleotides only to a preexisting nucleotide chain.) With automation, PCR can make billions of copies of a targeted segment of DNA in a few hours, significantly faster than the days it takes to clone a piece of DNA by making a recombinant plasmid and letting it replicate within bacteria. Amplifying a tiny DNA sample a billionfold does not produce much DNA, but it can be enough for some purposes, such as DNA fingerprinting for a murder trial.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 20-7. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR). PCR is a method for making many copies of a specific segment of DNA. It is much faster than gene cloning using a plasmid or phage vector and is performed completely in vitro. A PCR machine repeats the three-step cycle shown in this figure again and again, until the targeted sequence has been duplicated many times.

In the PCR procedure (see FIGURE 20.7), a three-step cycle brings about a chain reaction that produces an exponentially growing population of DNA molecules. The key to easy PCR automation is an unusual DNA polymerase that was first isolated from bacteria living in hot springs. Unlike most proteins, this enzyme can withstand the heat needed to separate the DNA strands at the start of each cycle.

Just as impressive as the speed of PCR is its specificity. By their complementarity to sequences bracketing the targeted sequence, the primers determine the DNA sequence that is amplified. (In fact, PCR requires knowledge of such sequences.) PCR can be used, for example, to amplify a specific gene prior to further cloning in cells. The PCR makes the gene by far the most abundant DNA fragment, thus simplifying the later task of finding a clone carrying that gene. In fact, PCR is so specific and powerful that its starting material does not even have to be purified DNA. Only minute amounts of DNA need be present in the starting material, and this DNA can be in a partially degraded state. Note, however, that PCR cannot substitute for gene cloning in cells when large amounts of a gene are desired. Occasional errors during PCR replication impose limits on the number of good copies that can be made by this method.

Devised in 1985, PCR has had a major impact on biological research and biotechnology. PCR has been used to amplify DNA from a wide variety of sources: fragments of ancient DNA from a 40,000-year-old frozen woolly mammoth; DNA from tiny amounts of blood, tissue, or semen found at the scenes of violent crimes; DNA from single embryonic cells for rapid prenatal diagnosis of genetic disorders; and DNA of viral genes from cells infected with such difficult-to-detect viruses as HIV. We'll return to applications of PCR later in the chapter.




