
 Estimating Earth's carrying capacity for humans is a complex problem

The projected human population of Earth depends on assumptions about future changes in birth and death rates. For 2050, the United Nations projects a population that might range from 7.3 to 10.7 billion people. Even at the low end of this range, without some catastrophe, there will be at least 1.3 billion people added to the population in the next 25 years because of the momentum of population growth. The question that arises from these projections is what size human population the biosphere can support. Is the world already overpopulated? Will it be overpopulated in 2050?

Wide Range of Estimates for Carrying Capacity

What is the carrying capacity of Earth for humans? This question has been asked for more than 300 years by scientists interested in demography. The first known estimate for the carrying capacity of Earth was made by Anton van Leeuwenhoek in 1679. Since then, the estimates of carrying capacity have varied from less than 1 billion to over 1,000 billion (a trillion people). The average of the various estimates is around 10-15 billion. Why should these estimates of carrying capacity be so variable?

Carrying capacity is difficult to estimate, and the scientists who produce these estimates use different methods to get their answers. Some researchers use curves like that produced by the logistic equation (see FIGURE 52.11) to predict the future maximum of the human population. Others generalize from existing "maximum" population density and multiply this by the area of land that could be inhabited. Still other estimates are based on a single assumed population constraint such as food. Basing carrying capacity on food as the limiting factor is one promising approach. However, such estimates are limited by the assumptions required about the amount of available farmland, the average yield of crops, the prevalent diet (vegetarian or meat eating), and the number of calories to be provided to each person each day.

Ecological Footprint

A more promising approach to estimating the carrying capacity of Earth is to recognize that we have multiple constraints: We need food, fuel, wood, and other amenities such as clothing and transportation. A recent advance in using multiple constraints to estimate human carrying capacity is summarized in the concept of an ecological footprint. For each nation, we can calculate the aggregate land and water area in various ecosystem categories that is appropriated by that nation to produce all the resources it consumes and to absorb all the waste it generates. Six types of ecologically productive areas are distinguished in calculating the ecological footprint: arable land (land suitable for crops), pasture, forest, ocean, built-up land, and fossil energy land. Fossil energy land is calculated on the basis of the land required for vegetation to absorb the CO2 produced by burning fossil fuels. All measures are converted to land area (hectares per person). If we add up all the ecologically productive land on the planet, we find that there is about 2 ha per person (1 ha = 2.47 acres). If we wish to reserve land for parks and conservation, we must reduce this to 1.7 ha per person. This is the benchmark for comparing the ecological footprints of nations.

FIGURE 52.23 graphs the ecological footprints for 13 countries and for the whole world as they stood in 1997. Two inferences are evident from the graph. First, the world in general was already in ecological deficit in 1997 when this study was conducted. Second, countries vary greatly in their individual footprint size and in their available ecological capacity (the actual resource base of each country). The United States has an ecological footprint of 8.4 ha per person but has only 6.2 ha per person of available ecological capacity. In other words, the United States has a bigger ecological footprint than its own land and resources can support. By this measure, the U.S. population is already above carrying capacity. By contrast, New Zealand has a larger ecological footprint of 9.8 ha per person but an available capacity of 14.3 ha per person, so it is below its carrying capacity. The overall analysis of human impacts via ecological footprints suggests that the world is already at or slightly above its carrying capacity.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 52-23. Ecological footprint in relation to available ecological capacity. The ecological footprint expresses in hectares of land per person the current demand of global resources made by each country. The available ecological capacity measures in land area per person the resource base of each particular country. Countries in black (above the red diagonal) were in an ecological deficit in 1997 when the study was conducted. Countries in blue (below the diagonal) still have resource surpluses.

We can only speculate about Earth's ultimate carrying capacity for the human population or about what factors will eventually limit our growth. Perhaps food will be the main factor. Malnutrition and famines are common in some countries, but they result mainly from unequal distribution, rather than inadequate production, of food. So far, technological improvements in agriculture have allowed food supplies to keep up with global population growth. However, we also know, based on principles of energy flow through ecosystems, that environments can support a larger number of herbivores than carnivores (see Chapter 54). If everyone ate as much meat as the wealthiest people in the world, less than half of the present world population could be fed on current food harvests. Nevertheless, it seems unlikely that people in wealthier countries will abandon the consumption of meat.

Perhaps we will eventually be limited by suitable space, like the gannets on ocean islands. Certainly, as our population grows, the conflict over how space will be utilized will intensify, and agricultural land may be developed for housing. There seem to be few limits, however, on how closely humans can be crowded together.

We could also run out of resources other than nutrients and space. Many people are concerned about supplies of nonrenewable resources, such as certain metals and fossil fuels. It is also possible that our population will eventually be limited by the capacity of the environment to absorb the wastes and other insults imposed by humans. For instance, heavy use of commercial fertilizers to produce large food crops already threatens the quality of groundwater in some agricultural areas. In cases such as this, current human occupants could lower Earth's long-term carrying capacity for future generations.

Some technological optimists have suggested that Earth's carrying capacity can be continually increased--that in fact humans have no practical limits to population growth. Technology has undoubtedly increased Earth's carrying capacity for humans, but no population can continue to grow indefinitely. Exactly what the world's human carrying capacity is and under what circumstances we will approach it are topics of great concern and debate. Ideally, human populations would reach carrying capacity smoothly and then level off. Unlike other organisms, we can decide whether zero population growth will be attained through social changes involving individual choice or government intervention or through increased mortality due to resource limitation, plagues, war, and environmental degradation.

For better or worse, we have the unique responsibility to decide the fate of our species and the rest of the biosphere. We will examine these issues in greater depth when we discuss the concept of sustainability in Chapter 55.




