
 Functional groups contribute to the molecular diversity of life

The components of organic molecules that are most commonly involved in chemical reactions are known as functional groups. If we think of hydrocarbons as the simplest organic molecules, we can view functional groups as attachments that replace one or more of the hydrogens bonded to the carbon skeleton of the hydrocarbon. (However, some functional groups include atoms of the carbon skeleton, as we will see.)

Each functional group behaves consistently from one organic molecule to another, and the number and arrangement of the groups help give each molecule its unique properties. Consider the differences between testosterone and estradiol (a type of estrogen). These compounds are male and female sex hormones, respectively, in humans and other vertebrates (FIGURE 4.8). Both are steroids, organic molecules with a common carbon skeleton in the form of four fused rings. These sex hormones differ mainly in the functional groups attached to the rings. The different actions of these two molecules on many targets throughout the body help produce the contrasting features of females and males. Thus, even our sexuality has its biological basis in variations of molecular architecture.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 4-8. A comparison of functional groups of female (estradiol) and male (testosterone) sex hormones. The two molecules differ mainly in the attachment of functional groups to a common carbon skeleton of four fused rings. (The carbon skeleton has been simplified here by omitting the carbons in the rings, as well as their hydrogens.) These subtle variations in molecular architecture influence the development of the anatomical and physiological differences between female and male vertebrates.

The six functional groups most important in the chemistry of life are the hydroxyl, carbonyl, carboxyl, amino, sulfhydryl, and phosphate groups (TABLE 4.1, p. 58). All are hydrophilic and thus increase the solubility of organic compounds in water.

Table 4-1. Functional Groups of Organic Compounds

Functional GroupFormulaName of CompoundsExampleHydroxylAlcoholsCarbonylAldehydesKetonesCarboxylCarboxylic acidsAminoAminesSulfhydrylThiolsPhosphateOrganic phosphatesThe ionized forms of the carboxyl and amino groups prevail in cells. However, acetic acid and glycine are represented here in their non-ionized forms.The Hydroxyl Group

In a hydroxyl group, a hydrogen atom is bonded to an oxygen atom, which in turn is bonded to the carbon skeleton of the organic molecule. Organic compounds containing hydroxyl groups are called alcohols, and their specific names usually end in -ol, as in ethanol, the drug present in alcoholic beverages. In a structural formula, the hydroxyl group is usually abbreviated by omission of the covalent bond between the oxygen and hydrogen and is written as--OH or HO--. (Do not confuse this functional group with the hydroxide ion, OH-, formed by the dissociation of bases such as sodium hydroxide.) The hydroxyl group is polar as a result of the electronegative oxygen atom drawing electrons toward itself. Consequently, water molecules are attracted to the hydroxyl group, and this helps dissolve organic compounds containing such groups. Sugars, for example, owe their solubility in water to the presence of multiple hydroxyl groups (see FIGURE 5.3).

The Carbonyl Group

The carbonyl group () consists of a carbon atom joined to an oxygen atom by a double bond. If the carbonyl group is on the end of a carbon skeleton, the organic compound is called an aldehyde; otherwise the compound is called a ketone. The simplest ketone is acetone, which is three carbons long (see TABLE 4.1). Acetone has different properties from propanal, a three-carbon aldehyde. (Acetone and propanal are structural isomers.) Thus, variation in locations of functional groups along carbon skeletons is a major source of molecular diversity.

The Carboxyl Group

When an oxygen atom is double-bonded to a carbon atom that is also bonded to a hydroxyl group, the entire assembly of atoms is called a carboxyl group (--COOH). Compounds containing carboxyl groups are known as carboxylic acids, or organic acids. The simplest is the one-carbon compound called formic acid (HCOOH), the substance some ants inject when they sting. Acetic acid, which has two carbons, gives vinegar its sour taste. (In general, acids taste sour.)

Why does a carboxyl group have acidic properties? A carboxyl group is a source of hydrogen ions. The covalent bond between the oxygen and the hydrogen is so polar that the hydrogen tends to dissociate reversibly from the molecule as an ion (H+). In the case of acetic acid, we have 
Dissociation occurs as a result of the two electronegative oxygen atoms of the carboxyl group pulling shared electrons away from hydrogen. If the double-bonded oxygen and the hydroxyl group were attached to separate carbon atoms, there would be less tendency for the --OH group to dissociate because the second oxygen would be farther away. Here is another example of how emergent properties result from a specific arrangement of building components.

The Amino Group

The amino group (--NH2) consists of a nitrogen atom bonded to two hydrogen atoms and to the carbon skeleton. Organic compounds with this functional group are called amines. An example is glycine, illustrated in TABLE 4.1. Because glycine also has a carboxyl group, it is both an amine and a carboxylic acid. Most of the cell's organic compounds have two or more different functional groups. Glycine and similar compounds having both amino and carboxyl groups are called amino acids; these are the molecular building blocks of proteins.

The amino group acts as a base. You learned in Chapter 3 that ammonia (NH3) can pick up a proton from the surrounding solution. Amino groups of organic compounds can do the same: 
This process gives the amino group a charge of +1, its most common state within the cell.

The Sulfhydryl Group

Sulfur is directly below oxygen in the periodic table; both have 6 valence electrons and form two covalent bonds. The organic functional group known as the sulfhydryl group (--SH), which consists of a sulfur atom bonded to an atom of hydrogen, resembles a hydroxyl group in shape (see TABLE 4.1). Organic compounds containing sulfhydryls are called thiols. In Chapter 5, you will learn how sulfhydryl groups can interact to help stabilize the intricate structure of a protein.

The Phosphate Group

Phosphate is an anion formed by dissociation of an inorganic acid called phosphoric acid (H3PO4). The loss of hydrogen ions by dissociation leaves the phosphate with two negative charges. Organic compounds containing a phosphate group () have a phosphate ion covalently attached by one of its oxygen atoms to the carbon skeleton (see TABLE 4.1). One function of phosphate groups is the transfer of energy between organic molecules. In Chapter 6, you will learn how cells harness the transfer of phosphate groups to perform work, such as the contraction of muscle cells.




