
 A reptilian heritage is evident in all amniotes

Reptilian Characteristics

Reptiles have several adaptations for terrestrial living not generally found in amphibians. Scales containing the protein keratin waterproof the skin of a reptile, helping prevent dehydration in dry air. Keratinized skin is the vertebrate analogue of the chitinized cuticle of insects and the waxy cuticle of land plants. Reptiles cannot breathe through their keratinized dry skin, and they obtain all their oxygen with lungs. Many turtles also use the moist surfaces of their cloaca for gas exchange.

Most reptiles lay shelled amniotic eggs on land (FIGURE 34.22). Fertilization in reptiles must occur internally, before the shell is secreted as the egg passes through the reproductive tract of the female. Some species of snakes and lizards are viviparous, their extraembryonic membranes forming a placenta that enables the embryo to obtain nutrients from its mother.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-22. A hatching reptile. This Komodo dragon is breaking out of a parchmentlike shell, a common type of shell among reptiles. The shells of some reptiles are harder because of an abundance of calcium carbonate, as in bird eggs.

Reptiles are sometimes labeled "cold-blooded" animals because they do not use their metabolism extensively to control body temperature. But reptiles do regulate body temperature by using behavioral adaptations. For example, many lizards regulate their internal temperature by basking in the sun when the air is cool and seeking shade when the air is too warm. Because they absorb external heat rather than generating much of their own, reptiles are said to be ectotherms, a term more appropriate than cold-blooded. (The control of body temperature is discussed in more detail in Chapter 44.) By heating directly with solar energy rather than through the metabolic breakdown of food, a reptile can survive on less than 10%  of the calories required by a mammal of equivalent size.

The Origin and Evolutionary Radiation of Reptiles

Reptiles were far more widespread, numerous, and diverse during the Mesozoic era than they are today. The oldest reptilian fossils are found in rocks from Kansas, dating to the late Carboniferous period; they are about 300 million years old. Their ancestor was among the Devonian amphibians. In two great waves of adaptive radiation, reptiles became the dominant terrestrial vertebrates in a dynasty that lasted more than 200 million years.

The first major reptilian radiation occurred by the dawn of the Permian, the last period of the Paleozoic era, giving rise to the three main evolutionary branches introduced in FIGURE 34.20: Synapsida, Anapsida, and Diapsida.

The second great reptilian radiation was under way by late Triassic times (a little more than 200 million years ago) and was marked mainly by the origin and diversification of two groups of reptiles: the dinosaurs, which lived on land, and the pterosaurs, or flying reptiles. These groups were the dominant vertebrates on Earth for millions of years. Pterosaurs had wings formed from a membrane of skin stretched from the body wall, along the forelimb, to the tip of an elongated finger. Stiff fibers provided support for the skin of the wing. Dinosaurs, an extremely diverse group varying in body shape, size, and habitat, in cluded the largest animals ever to inhabit land. Fossils of gigantic dinosaurs that were 45 m long have recently been unearthed in New Mexico and Utah. And Paul Sereno, the paleontologist you met on pages 508-509, has led teams that have unearthed many newly described dinosaurs that lived on land masses now located in the Southern Hemisphere. There were two main dinosaur lineages: the ornithischians, mostly herbivores; and the saurischians, with both herbivorous and carnivorous dinosaurs, including the ancestors of birds.

Contradicting the long-standing view that dinosaurs were slow, sluggish creatures, there is increasing evidence that many dinosaurs were agile, fast-moving, and, in some species, social. Paleontologists have also discovered signs of parental care among dinosaurs (FIGURE 34.23). There is continuing debate about whether dinosaurs were endothermic, capable of keeping the body warm through metabolism. Some anatomical evidence supports this hypothesis, but many experts are skeptical. The Mesozoic climate was relatively warm and consistent, and behavioral adaptations such as basking may have been sufficient for maintaining a suitable body temperature, especially for the land-dwelling dinosaurs. Also, large dinosaurs had low surface-to-volume ratios that reduced the effects of daily fluctuations in air temperature on the internal temperature of the animal. However, given the enormous diversity of dinosaurs, the clade could have included some endothermic species, especially among smaller forms inhabiting relatively cool climates. The dinosaur that gave rise to birds was certainly endothermic, as are all birds.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-23. Dinosaur social behavior and parental care. This artist's re-creation of duck-billed dinosaurs is based on 80-million-year-old fossils discovered in Montana. Dinosaurs of this species were relatively large, about 7 m in length. They used their bills to browse on plants. Fossilized footprints indicate that duck-billed dinosaurs traveled in large social groups, or herds. Fossilized nests contain both eggs and offspring up to a few months old, evidence that these dinosaurs took care of their young. In fact, the genus name for this dinosaur, Maiasaura, means "good mother lizard."

At the end of the Cretaceous, the last period of the Mesozoic era, the dinosaurs became extinct. Some paleontologists argue that a few species survived into the early Cenozoic. The fossil record of terrestrial vertebrates in the Cretaceous is relatively poor, and it is uncertain whether the dinosaurs were undergoing a decline before they were finished off by the asteroid impact we discussed in Chapter 25. Either way, the greatest age of the reptiles had come to an end.

Modern Reptiles

There are about 6,500 species of extant reptiles. Taxonomists classify them into four groups: Testudines (turtles); Sphenodontia (tuataras); Squamata (lizards and snakes), and Crocodilia (alligators and crocodiles). In the traditional classification scheme of FIGURE 34.21a, these four taxa are orders within the class Reptilia; in the alternative classification of FIGURE 34.21c, the four taxa are elevated to the class level.

Turtles evolved during the Mesozoic era and have scarcely changed since (FIGURE 34.24a). The usually hard shell, an adaptation that protects against predators, has certainly contributed to this long success. Those turtles that returned to water during their evolution crawl ashore to lay their eggs.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-24. Extant reptiles. (a) Turtles have changed little since their origin early in the Mesozoic era. This species is an eastern box turtle. (b) Lizards, such as this Australian frillneck, are the most numerous and diverse of the extant reptiles. A frillneck only spreads its frill when threatened, a response that probably discourages many predators. (c) Snakes may have evolved from lizards that adapted to a burrowing lifestyle. Note the loosely-hinged jaw of this western diamondback rattlesnake, photographed during an attempted strike. (d) Crocodiles and alligators are the reptiles most closely related to dinosaurs and birds. An American alligator is shown here.

Lizards are the most numerous and diverse reptiles alive today (FIGURE 34.24b). Most are relatively small; perhaps they were able to survive the Cretaceous "crunch" by nesting in crevices and decreasing their activity during cold periods, a practice many modern lizards use.

Snakes are probably descendants of lizards that adapted to a burrowing lifestyle. Today, most snakes live above the ground, but they have retained the limbless condition. Vestigial pelvic and limb bones in primitive snakes such as boas, however, are evidence that snakes evolved from reptiles with legs.

Snakes are carnivorous, and a number of adaptations aid them in hunting and eating prey. They have acute chemical sensors, and though they lack eardrums, snakes are sensitive to ground vibrations, which helps them detect the movements of prey. Heat-detecting organs between the eyes and nostrils of pit vipers, including rattlesnakes, are sensitive to minute temperature changes, enabling these night hunters to locate warm animals. Poisonous snakes inject their toxin through a pair of sharp hollow or grooved teeth. The flicking tongue is not poisonous but helps fan odors toward olfactory organs on the roof of the mouth. Loosely articulated jaws enable most snakes to swallow prey larger than the diameter of the snake itself (FIGURE 34.24c).

Crocodiles and alligators (crocodilians) are among the largest living reptiles (some turtles are heavier) (FIGURE 34.24d). They spend most of their time in water, breathing air through their upturned nostrils. Crocodilians are confined to the warm regions of Africa, China, Indonesia, India, Australia, South America, and the southeastern United States, where alligators have made a strong comeback after spending years on the endangered species list. Among the modern animals traditionally classified as reptiles, crocodilians are the most closely related to the dinosaurs (see FIGURE 34.20). However, as we pointed out earlier, the modern animals that seem to share the most recent ancestor with the dinosaurs are the birds.




