
 Atoms combine by chemical bonding to form molecules

Now that we have looked at the structure of atoms, we can move up in the hierarchy of organization and see how atoms combine to form molecules. Atoms with incomplete valence shells interact with certain other atoms in such a way that each partner completes its valence shell. Atoms do this by either sharing or transferring valence electrons. These interactions usually result in atoms staying close together, held by attractions called chemical bonds. The strongest kinds of chemical bonds are covalent bonds and ionic bonds.

Covalent Bonds

A covalent bond is the sharing of a pair of valence electrons by two atoms. For example, let's consider what happens when two hydrogen atoms approach each other. Recall that hydrogen has 1 valence electron in the first shell, but the shell's capacity is 2 electrons. When the two hydrogen atoms come close enough for their 1s orbitals to overlap, they share their electrons (FIGURE 2.12a). Each hydrogen atom now has 2 electrons associated with it in what amounts to a completed valence shell. Two or more atoms held together by covalent bonds constitute a molecule. In this case, we have formed a hydrogen molecule. We can abbreviate the structure of this molecule as H--H, where the line represents a covalent bond--that is, a pair of shared electrons. This notation, which represents both atoms and bonding, is called a structural formula. We can abbreviate even further by writing H2, a molecular formula indicating simply that the molecule consists of two atoms of hydrogen.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 2-12. Covalent bonding in four molecules. A single covalent bond consists of a pair of shared electrons. The number of electrons required to complete an atom's valence shell generally determines how many bonds that atom will form.

With 6 electrons in its second electron shell, oxygen needs 2 more electrons to complete its valence shell. Two oxygen atoms form a molecule by sharing two pairs of valence electrons (FIGURE 2.12b). The atoms are thus joined by what is called a double covalent bond.

Each atom that can share valence electrons has a bonding capacity corresponding to the number of covalent bonds the atom can form. When the bonds form, they give the atom a full complement of valence electrons. The bonding capacity of oxygen, for example, is 2. This bonding capacity is called the atom's valence and generally equals the number of unpaired electrons in the atom's outermost (valence) shell. You can readily determine the valences of life's most abundant elements from the electron configurations in FIGURE 2.10: The valence of hydrogen is 1; oxygen, 2; nitrogen, 3; and carbon, 4. One more complicated case is phosphorus (P), another element important to life. Phosphorus can have a valence of 3, as we would predict from its 3 unpaired electrons. In biologically important molecules, however, it generally has a valence of 5, forming three single bonds and one double bond.

The molecules H2 and O2 are pure elements, not compounds. (Recall that a compound is a combination of two or more different elements.) An example of a molecule that is a compound is water, with the molecular formula H2O. It takes two atoms of hydrogen to satisfy the valence of one oxygen atom. FIGURE 2.12c shows the structure of a water molecule. Water is so important to life that Chapter 3 is devoted entirely to its structure and behavior.

Another molecule that is a compound is methane, the main component of natural gas, with the molecular formula CH4 (FIGURE 2.12d). It takes four hydrogen atoms, each with a valence of 1, to complement one atom of carbon, with its valence of 4. We will look at many other compounds of carbon in Chapter 4.

Nonpolar and Polar Covalent Bonds. The attraction of an atom for the electrons of a covalent bond is called its electronegativity. The more electronegative an atom, the more strongly it pulls shared electrons toward itself. In a covalent bond between two atoms of the same element, the outcome of the tug-of-war for common electrons is a standoff; the two atoms are equally electronegative. Such a bond, in which the electrons are shared equally, is a nonpolar covalent bond. The covalent bond of H2 is nonpolar, as is the double bond of O2. The bonds of methane (CH4) are also nonpolar; although the partners are different elements, carbon and hydrogen do not differ substantially in electronegativity. In other compounds, however, where one atom is bonded to a more electronegative atom, the electrons of the bond will not be shared equally. This sort of bond is called a polar covalent bond. For example, the bonds between the oxygen and hydrogen atoms of a water molecule are polar (FIGURE 2.13). Oxygen is one of the most electronegative of the 92 elements, attracting shared electrons much more strongly than hydrogen does. In a covalent bond between oxygen and hydrogen, the electrons spend more time near the oxygen nucleus than they do near the hydrogen nucleus. Because electrons have a negative charge, the unequal sharing of electrons in water causes the oxygen atom to have a partial negative charge and each hydrogen atom a partial positive charge.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 2-13. Polar covalent bonds in a water molecule. Oxygen, being much more electronegative than hydrogen, pulls the shared electrons of the covalent bonds toward itself, as indicated by the arrows. This unequal sharing of electrons gives the oxygen a partial negative charge and the hydrogens a partial positive charge. The Greek symbol delta (d) indicates that the charges are less than full units. This "space-filling" model approximates the true shape of H2O.

Ionic Bonds

In some cases, two atoms are so unequal in their attraction for valence electrons that the more electronegative atom strips an electron completely away from its partner. This is what happens when an atom of sodium (11Na) encounters an atom of chlorine (17Cl) (FIGURE 2.14). A sodium atom has a total of 11 electrons, with its single valence electron in the third electron shell. A chlorine atom has a total of 17 electrons, with 7 electrons in its valence shell. When these two atoms meet, the lone valence electron of sodium is transferred to the chlorine atom, and both atoms end up with their valence shells complete. (Because sodium no longer has an electron in the third shell, the second shell is now the valence shell.)



Click image to enlarge



Fig 2-14. Electron transfer and ionic bonding. A valence electron can be transferred from sodium (Na) to chlorine (Cl), giving both atoms completed valence shells. The electron transfer leaves the sodium atom with a net charge of +1 (cation) and the chlorine atom with a net charge of -1 (anion). The attraction between the oppositely charged atoms, or ions, is an ionic bond. Ions can bond not only to atoms with which they have reacted, but to any other ions of opposite charge.

The electron transfer between the two atoms moves one unit of negative charge from sodium to chlorine. Sodium, now with 11 protons but only 10 electrons, has a net electrical charge of +1. A charged atom (or molecule) is called an ion. When the charge is positive, the ion is specifically called a cation; the sodium atom has become a cation. Conversely, the chlorine atom, having gained an extra electron, now has 17 protons and 18 electrons, giving it a net electrical charge of -1. It has become a chloride ion--an anion, or negatively charged ion. Because of their opposite charges, cations and anions attract each other in what is called an ionic bond. Any two ions of opposite charge can form an ionic bond. The ions need not have acquired their charge by an electron transfer with each other.

Compounds formed by ionic bonds are called ionic compounds, or salts. We know the ionic compound sodium chloride (NaCl) as table salt (FIGURE 2.15). Salts are often found in nature as crystals of various sizes and shapes, each an aggregate of vast numbers of cations and anions bonded by their electrical attraction and arranged in a three-dimensional lattice. A salt crystal does not consist of molecules in the sense that a covalent compound does, because a covalently bonded molecule has a definite size and number of atoms. The formula for an ionic compound, such as NaCl, indicates only the ratio of elements in a crystal of the salt. "NaCl" is not a molecule.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 2-15. A sodium chloride crystal. The sodium ions (Na+) and chloride ions (Cl-) are held together by ionic bonds. The formula NaCl tells us that the ratio of Na+ to Cl- is 1:1.

Not all salts have equal numbers of cations and anions. For example, the ionic compound magnesium chloride (MgCl2) has two chloride ions for each magnesium ion. Magnesium (12Mg) must lose 2 outer electrons if the atom is to have a complete valence shell, so it tends to become a cation with a net charge of +2 (Mg2+). One magnesium cation can therefore form ionic bonds with two chloride anions.

The term ion also applies to entire molecules that are electrically charged. In the salt ammonium chloride (NH4Cl), for instance, the anion is a single chloride ion (Cl-), but the cation is ammonium (NH4+), a nitrogen atom with four covalently bonded hydrogen atoms. The whole ammonium ion has an electrical charge of +1 because it is 1 electron short.

Environment affects the strength of ionic bonds. In a dry salt crystal, the bonds are so strong that it takes a hammer and chisel to break enough of them to crack the crystal in two. Place the same salt crystal in water, however, and the salt dissolves as the attractions between its ions decrease. In the next chapter, you will learn how water dissolves salts.




