
PLANT RESPONSES TO LIGHT

 

 Blue-light photoreceptors are a heterogeneous group of pigments



 

 Phytochromes function as photoreceptors in many plant responses to light



 

 Biological clocks control circadian rhythms in plants and other eukaryotes



 

 Light entrains the biological clock



 

 Photoperiodism synchronizes many plant responses to changes of season



Light is an especially important environmental factor in the lives of plants. In addition to being required for photosynthesis, light also cues many key events in plant growth and development. These effects of light on plant morphology are what plant biologists call photomorphogenesis. Light reception is also important in allowing plants to measure the passage of days and seasons.

Plants detect not just the presence of light, but also its direction, intensity, and wavelengths (colors). Recall from Chapter 10 that an action spectrum is a graph that relates physiological response to wavelength of light. The action spectrum for photosynthesis, for example, has two peaks, one in the red and one in the blue (see FIGURE 10.8). This is because chlorophyll absorbs light primarily in the red and blue portions of the visible spectrum. Action spectra, however, are useful in the study of any process that depends on light. By comparing action spectra of different plant responses researchers can determine which responses are mediated by the same photoreceptor (pigment). Scientists can also compare action spectra to the absorption spectra of putative photoreceptor molecules. An absorption spectrum is a graph profiling the wavelengths of light a particular pigment absorbs. A close correspondence between an action spectrum of a plant response and the absorption spectrum of a purified pigment suggests that the pigment may be the photoreceptor involved in mediating the response.

Action spectra reveal that red and blue light are the most important colors in regulating a plant's photomorphogenesis. These observations led researchers to two major classes of light receptors: a heterogeneous group of blue-light photoreceptors and a family of photoreceptors called phytochromes that absorb mostly red light.




