
 Nephrons and associated blood vessels are the functional units of the mammalian kidney

Mammals have a pair of kidneys. Each kidney, bean-shaped and about 10 cm long in humans, is supplied with blood by a renal artery and a renal vein (FIGURE 44.21). Blood flow through the kidneys is voluminous. In humans the kidneys account for less than 1%  of body weight, but they receive about 20%  of resting cardiac output. Urine exits each kidney through a duct called the ureter, and both ureters drain into a common urinary bladder. During urination, urine is expelled from the urinary bladder through a tube called the urethra, which empties to the outside near the vagina in females or through the penis in males. Sphincter muscles near the junction of the urethra and the bladder control urination.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 44-21. The human excretory system at four size scales.

Structure and Function of the Nephron and Associated Structures

The mammalian kidney has two distinct regions, an outer renal cortex and an inner renal medulla (see FIGURE 44.21). Packing both regions are microscopic excretory tubules and their associated blood vessels. The nephron--the functional unit of the vertebrate kidney--consists of a single long tubule and a ball of capillaries called the glomerulus. The blind end of the tubule forms a cup-shaped swelling, called Bowman's capsule, which surrounds the glomerulus. Each human kidney packs about a million nephrons, with a total tubule length of 80 km.

Filtration of the Blood. Filtration occurs as blood pressure forces fluid from the blood in the glomerulus into the lumen of Bowman's capsule. The porous capillaries, along with specialized cells of the capsule called podocytes, are permeable to water and small solutes but not to blood cells or large molecules such as plasma proteins. Filtration of small molecules is nonselective and the filtrate in the Bowman's capsule contains salts, glucose, and vitamins; nitrogenous wastes such as urea; and other small molecules--a mixture that mirrors the concentrations of these substances in blood plasma.

Pathway of the Filtrate. From Bowman's capsule, the filtrate passes through three regions of the nephron: the proximal tubule; the loop of Henle, a hairpin turn with a descending limb and an ascending limb; and the distal tubule. The distal tubule empties into a collecting duct, which receives processed filtrate from many nephrons. The many collecting ducts of the kidney empty into the renal pelvis, which is drained by the ureter.

In the human kidney, about 80%  of the nephrons, the cortical nephrons, have reduced loops of Henle and are almost entirely confined to the renal cortex. The other 20% , the juxtamedullary nephrons, have well-developed loops that extend deeply into the renal medulla (see FIGURE 44.21). Only mammals and birds have juxtamedullary nephrons; the nephrons of other vertebrates lack loops of Henle. It is the juxtamedullary nephrons that enable mammals to produce urine that is hyperosmotic to body fluids, an adaptation that is extremely important for water conservation.

The nephron and the collecting duct are lined by a transport epithelium that processes the filtrate to form the urine. One of this epithelium's most important tasks is reabsorption of solutes and water. From 1,100 to 2,000 L of blood flows through a pair of human kidneys each day, a volume about 275 times the total volume of blood in the body. From this enormous traffic of blood, the nephrons and collecting ducts process about 180 L of initial filtrate, equivalent to two or three times the body weight of an average person. Of this, nearly all of the sugar, vitamins, and other organic nutrients, and about 99%  of the water, are reabsorbed into the blood, leaving only about 1.5 L of urine to be voided.

Blood Vessels Associated with the Nephrons. Each nephron is supplied with blood by an afferent arteriole, a branch of the renal artery that subdivides into the capillaries of the glomerulus. The capillaries converge as they leave the glomerulus, forming an efferent arteriole. This vessel subdivides again into a second network of capillaries, the peritubular capillaries, which surround the proximal and distal tubules. Additional capillaries extend downward to form the vasa recta, the capillary system that serves the loop of Henle. The vasa recta is also a loop, with a descending vessel and an ascending vessel conveying blood in opposite directions.

Although the excretory tubules and their surrounding capillaries are closely associated, they do not exchange materials directly. The tubules and capillaries are immersed in interstitial fluid, through which various substances diffuse between the plasma within capillaries and the filtrate within the nephron tubule.

From Blood Filtrate to Urine: A Closer Look

In this section we concentrate on how the filtrate becomes urine as it flows through the mammalian nephron and collecting duct. The circled numbers correspond to the numbers in FIGURE 44.22, page 946.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 44-22. The nephron and collecting duct: regional functions of the transport epithelium. The numbered regions in this diagram are keyed to the circled numbers in the text discussion of kidney function.


			  
		Proximal tubule. Secretion and reabsorption in the proximal tubule substantially alter the volume and composition of filtrate. For example, the cells of the transport epithelium help maintain a constant pH in body fluids by the controlled secretion of hydrogen ions. The cells also synthesize and secrete ammonia, which neutralizes the acid and keeps the filtrate from becoming too acidic. The more acidic the filtrate, the more ammonia the cells produce and secrete, and the urine of a mammal usually contains some ammonia from this source (even though most nitrogenous waste is excreted as urea). The proximal tubules also reabsorb about 90%  of the important buffer bicarbonate (HCO3-). Drugs and other poisons that have been processed in the liver pass from the peritubular capillaries into the interstitial fluid, and then are secreted across the epithelium of the proximal tubule into the nephron's lumen. Conversely, valuable nutrients, including glucose, amino acids, and potassium (K+), are actively or passively transported from the filtrate to the interstitial fluid, and then move into the peritubular capillaries.

One of the most important functions of the proximal tubule is reabsorption of most of the NaCl (salt) and water from the huge initial filtrate volume. Salt in the filtrate diffuses into the cells of the transport epithelium, and the membranes of the cells actively transport Na+ into the interstitial fluid. This transfer of positive charge is balanced by the passive transport of Cl- out of the tubule. As salt moves from the filtrate to the interstitial fluid, water follows by osmosis. The exterior side of the epithelium has a much smaller surface area than the side facing the lumen, which minimizes leakage of salt and water back into the tubule. Instead, the salt and water now diffuse from the interstitial fluid into the peritubular capillaries.


			  
		Descending limb of the loop of Henle. Reabsorption of water continues as the filtrate moves into the descending limb of the loop of Henle. Here the transport epithelium is freely permeable to water but not very permeable to salt and other small solutes. For water to move out of the tubule by osmosis, the interstitial fluid bathing the tubule must be hyperosmotic to the filtrate. The osmolarity of the interstitial fluid does in fact become progressively greater from the outer cortex to the inner medulla of the kidney (the mechanism that maintains this gradient will be discussed shortly). Thus, filtrate moving downward from the cortex to the medulla within the descending limb of the loop of Henle continues to lose water to interstitial fluid of greater and greater osmolarity. As water departs by osmosis, the solute concentration of the filtrate increases.


			  
		Ascending limb of the loop of Henle. The filtrate reaches the tip of the loop, deep in the renal medulla in the case of juxtamedullary nephrons, then moves back to the cortex within the ascending limb. In contrast to the descending limb, the transport epithelium of the ascending limb is permeable to salt but not to water. The ascending limb actually has two specialized regions: a thin segment near the loop tip and a thick segment adjacent to the distal tubule. As filtrate ascends in the thin segment, NaCl, which became concentrated in the descending limb, diffuses out of the permeable tubule into the interstitial fluid. This movement of salt adds to the high osmolarity of the interstitial fluid in the medulla. The exodus of salt from the filtrate continues in the thick segment of the ascending limb, but here the epithelium actively transports NaCl into the interstitial fluid. By losing salt without giving up water, the filtrate becomes progressively more dilute as it moves up to the cortex in the ascending limb of the loop.


			  
		Distal tubule. The distal tubule is another important site of secretion and reabsorption. It plays a key role in regulating the K+ and NaCl concentration of body fluids by varying the amount of the K+ that is secreted into the filtrate and the amount of NaCl reabsorbed from the filtrate. Like the proximal tubule, the distal tubule also contributes to pH regulation, by the controlled secretion of H+ and reabsorption of bicarbonate (HCO3-).


			  
		Collecting duct. The collecting duct carries the filtrate through the medulla to the renal pelvis. By actively reabsorbing NaCl, the transport epithelium of the collecting duct plays a large role in determining how much salt is actually excreted in the urine. The epithelium is permeable to water but not to salt or (in the renal cortex) to urea. Thus, as the collecting duct traverses the gradient of osmolarity in the kidney, the filtrate becomes increasingly concentrated as it loses more and more water by osmosis to the hyperosmotic interstitial fluid. In the inner medulla, the duct becomes permeable to urea. Because of the high urea concentration in the filtrate at this point, some urea diffuses out of the duct and into the interstitial fluid. Along with NaCl, this interstitial urea is a major solute contributing to the high osmolarity of the interstitial fluid in the medulla. It is this high osmolarity that enables the mammalian kidney to conserve water by excreting urine that is hyperosmotic to the general body fluids.




