
 Sex-linked genes have unique patterns of inheritance

In addition to their role in determining sex, the sex chromosomes, especially X chromosomes, have genes for many characters unrelated to sex. In humans, the term sex-linked usually refers to genes on the X chromosome. These genes follow the same pattern of inheritance that Morgan observed for the white-eye locus in Drosophila. Fathers pass sex-linked alleles to all of their daughters but none of their sons (FIGURE 15.9). In contrast, mothers can pass sex-linked alleles to both sons and daughters.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 15-9. The transmission of sex-linked recessive traits. In this diagram, the superscript A represents a dominant allele carried on the X chromosome, and the superscript a represents a recessive allele. Imagine that this recessive allele is a mutation that causes a sex-linked disorder, such as hemophilia. White boxes indicate unaffected individuals, light-colored boxes indicate carriers, and dark-colored boxes indicate individuals with the sex-linked disorder.

If a sex-linked trait is due to a recessive allele, a female will express the phenotype only if she is a homozygote. Because males have only one locus, the terms homozygous and heterozygous lack meaning for describing their sex-linked genes (the term hemizygous is used in such cases). Any male receiving the recessive allele from his mother will express the trait. For this reason, far more males than females have disorders that are inherited as sex-linked recessives. However, even though the chance of a female inheriting a double dose of the mutant allele is much less than the probability of a male inheriting a single dose, there are females with sex-linked disorders. For instance, color blindness is a mild disorder inherited as a sex-linked trait. A color-blind daughter may be born to a color-blind father whose mate is a carrier (see FIGURE 15.9c). However, because the sex-linked allele for color blindness is relatively rare, the probability that such a man and woman will mate is low.

Sex-Linked Disorders in Humans

A number of human sex-linked disorders are much more serious than color blindness. An example is Duchenne muscular dystrophy, which affects about one out of every 3,500 males born in the United States. People with Duchenne muscular dystrophy rarely live past their early 20s. The disease is characterized by a progressive weakening of the muscles and loss of coordination. Researchers have traced the disorder to the absence of a key muscle protein called dystrophin and have tracked the gene for this protein to a specific locus on the X chromosome. These discoveries may eventually lead to treatments to prevent the disease from progressing.

Hemophilia is a sex-linked recessive trait defined by the absence of one or more of the proteins required for blood clotting. When a person with hemophilia is injured, bleeding is prolonged because a firm clot is slow to form. Small cuts in the skin are usually not a problem, but bleeding in the muscles or joints, which can occur without known cause, can be painful and can lead to serious damage. Today, people with hemophilia are treated as needed with intravenous injections of the missing protein.

Hemophilia has an interesting history. The ancient Hebrews must have had some understanding of its hereditary pattern because sons born to women having a family history of hemophilia were exempted from circumcision. Moreover, a high frequency of sex-linked hemophilia has plagued the royal families of Europe. The first hemophiliac in the royal line seems to have been Leopold, a son of Queen Victoria (1819-1901) of England. The recessive allele for hemophilia was probably introduced to the royal family through a mutation in one of the sex cells of Victoria's mother or father, making Victoria a heterozygote, a carrier of the deadly allele. Leopold survived to father a daughter who was also a carrier, transmitting hemophilia to one of her sons. Hemophilia was eventually brought to the royal families of Prussia, Russia, and Spain through the marriages of two of Victoria's daughters.

X Inactivation in Female Mammals

Although female mammals, including humans, inherit two X chromosomes, one X chromosome in each cell becomes almost completely inactivated during embryonic development. As a result, the cells of females and males have the same effective dose (one copy) of genes with loci on the X chromosome. The inactive X in each cell of a female condenses into a compact object, called a Barr body, which lies along the inside of the nuclear envelope. Most of the genes of the X chromosome that forms the Barr body are not expressed, although some remain active. (Barr-body chromosomes are reactivated in the ovary cells that give rise to ova.)

British geneticist Mary Lyon has demonstrated that the selection of which of the two X chromosomes will form the Barr body occurs randomly and independently in each of the embryonic cells present at the time of X inactivation. As a consequence, females consist of a mosaic of two types of cells (FIGURE 15.10): those with the active X derived from the father and those with the active X derived from the mother. After an X chromosome is inactivated in a particular cell, all mitotic descendants of that cell have the same inactive X. Therefore, if the female is heterozygous for a sex-linked trait, approximately half her cells will express one allele, while the others will express the alternate allele. This mosaicism can be seen in the coloration of a tortoiseshell cat, which has patches of orange and black fur (see FIGURE 15.10). In humans, mosaicism can be seen in a recessive X-linked mutation that prevents the development of sweat glands. A woman who is heterozygous for this trait has patches of normal skin and patches of skin lacking sweat glands.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 15-10. X inactivation and the tortoiseshell cat. The tortoiseshell gene is on the X chromosome, and the tortoiseshell phenotype requires the presence of two different alleles, one for orange fur and one for nonorange (black) fur. Normally, only females can have both alleles, because only they have two X chromosomes. If a female is heterozygous for the tortoiseshell gene, she is tortoiseshell. Orange patches are formed by populations of cells in which the Xchromosome with the orange allele is active: black patches have cells in which the X chromosome with the nonorange allele is active. ("Calico" cats also have white areas, which are determined by yet another gene.)

Inactivation of an X chromosome involves attachment of methyl groups (--CH3) to cytosine, one of the nitrogenous bases of DNA nucleotides. (The regulatory role of DNA methylation is discussed in more detail in Chapter 19.) But what determines which of the two X chromosomes is targeted for methylation? Researchers have discovered a gene that is active only on the Barr-body chromosome. The gene is called XIST, for X-inactive specific transcript. The gene's product, or "specific transcript," is an RNA molecule, and multiple copies of this molecule apparently attach to the X chromosome where they are made, eventually almost covering it. Interaction of this RNA with the chromosome seems to initiate X inactivation. But this finding leads to more questions. What exactly is the connection between XIST RNA and DNA methylation? And what determines which of the two X chromosomes in each of a female's cells will have a continually active XIST gene and become the Barr body? Our understanding of X inactivation is still rudimentary.




