
Chapter 52: POPULATION ECOLOGY

CHARACTERISTICS OF POPULATIONS

   Two important characteristics of any population are density and the spacing of individuals

   Demography is the study of factors that affect the growth and decline of populations



LIFE HISTORIES

   Life histories are highly diverse, but they exhibit patterns in their variability

   Limited resources mandate trade-offs between investments in reproduction and survival



POPULATION GROWTH

   The exponential model of population growth describes an idealized population in an unlimited environment

   The logistic model of population growth incorporates the concept of carrying capacity



POPULATION-LIMITING FACTORS

   Negative feedback prevents unlimited population growth

   Population dynamics reflect a complex interaction of biotic and abiotic influences

   Some populations have regular boom-and-bust cycles



HUMAN POPULATION GROWTH

   The human population has been growing almost exponentially for three centuries but cannot do so indefinitely

   Estimating Earth's carrying capacity for humans is a complex problem

The size and activities of the human population are now among Earth's most significant problems. With a population of over 6 billion individuals, our species requires vast amounts of materials and space, including places to live, land to grow our food, and places to dump our waste. Endlessly expanding our presence on Earth, we have devastated the environment for many other species and now threaten to make it unfit for ourselves.

To understand human population growth, we must consider the general principles of population ecology. It is obvious that no population can continue to grow indefinitely. Species other than humans sometimes exhibit population explosions, but their populations inevitably decline. In contrast to these radical booms and busts, many populations are relatively stable over time, with only minor changes in population size.

In our earlier study of biological populations (see Chapter 23), we emphasized the relationship between population genetics--the structure and dynamics of gene pools--and evolution. Evolution remains our central theme as we now view populations in the context of ecology. Population ecology, the subject of this chapter, is concerned with measuring changes in population size and composition, and with identifying the ecological causes of these fluctuations. Later in this chapter, we will return to our discussion of the human population. Let's first examine some of the structural and dynamic aspects of populations as they apply to any species, such as the monarch butterfly population in the photo on this page.




