
 An animal's nitrogenous wastes are correlated with its phylogeny and habitat

Because most metabolic wastes must be dissolved in water when they are removed from the body (a major exception being loss of carbon dioxide in air-breathing animals), the type and quantity of waste products may have a large impact on water balance. In terms of their effect on osmoregulation, among the most important wastes are the nitrogenous (nitrogen-containing) breakdown products of proteins and nucleic acids. When these macromolecules are broken apart for energy or converted to carbohydrates or fats, enzymes remove nitrogen in the form of ammonia, a small and very toxic molecule. Some animals excrete ammonia directly, but many species first convert it to compounds such as urea or uric acid, which are less toxic but require energy in the form of ATP to produce.

In general, the kinds of nitrogenous wastes excreted depend on an animal's evolutionary history and habitat--especially the availability of water (FIGURE 44.13, p. 938). The amount of nitrogenous waste produced is coupled to the energy budget, as it strongly depends on how much and what kind of food an animal eats. Because they use energy at high rates, endotherms eat more food--and therefore produce more nitrogenous wastes--than ectotherms. Predators, which derive much of their energy from dietary proteins, need to excrete more nitrogen than animals that rely mainly on lipids or carbohydrates as energy sources.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 44-13. Nitrogenous wastes.

Ammonia

Because ammonia is very soluble but can only be tolerated at very low concentrations, animals that excrete nitrogenous wastes as ammonia need access to lots of water. Therefore, ammonia excretion is most common in aquatic species. Ammonia molecules easily pass through membranes and are readily lost by diffusion to the surrounding water. In many invertebrates, ammonia release occurs across the whole body surface. In fishes, most of the ammonia is lost as ammonium ions (NH4+) across the epithelium of the gills, with kidneys excreting only minor amounts of nitrogenous wastes. In freshwater fishes, the gill epithelium takes up Na+ from the water in exchange for NH4+, which helps to maintain a much higher Na+ concentration in body fluids than in the surrounding water.

Urea

Although it works well in many aquatic species, ammonia excretion is much less suitable for land animals. Because it is so toxic, ammonia can only be transported and excreted in large volumes of very dilute solutions, and most terrestrial animals and many marine species (which tend to lose water to their environment by osmosis) simply do not have access to sufficient water. Instead, mammals, most adult amphibians, and many marine fishes and turtles excrete mainly urea, a substance produced in the vertebrate liver by a metabolic cycle that combines ammonia with carbon dioxide. The circulatory system carries urea to the excretory organs, the kidneys.

The main advantage of urea is its low toxicity, about 100,000 times less than that of ammonia. This permits animals to transport and store urea safely at high concentrations. And this greatly reduces the amount of water required for nitrogen excretion, because much less water is lost when a given quantity of nitrogen is excreted in a concentrated solution of urea rather than a dilute solution of ammonia.

The main disadvantage of urea is that animals must expend energy to produce it from ammonia. From a bioenergetic standpoint, we would predict that animals that spend part of their lives in water and part on land would switch between excreting ammonia (thereby saving energy) and urea (reducing excretory water loss). In fact, many amphibians excrete mainly ammonia when they are aquatic tadpoles and switch largely to urea when they are land-dwelling adults.

Uric Acid

Land snails, insects, birds, and many reptiles excrete uric acid as the major nitrogenous waste. Like urea, uric acid is relatively nontoxic. But unlike either ammonia or urea, uric acid is largely insoluble in water and can be excreted as a semisolid paste with very small water loss. This is a great advantage for animals with little access to water, but there is a cost: Uric acid is even more energetically expensive to produce than urea, requiring considerable ATP for synthesis from ammonia.

Uric acid and urea represent different adaptations for excreting nitrogenous wastes with minimal water loss. One factor that seems to have been important in determining which of these alternatives evolved in a particular group of animals is the mode of reproduction. Soluble wastes can diffuse out of a shell-less amphibian egg or be carried away by the mother's blood in a mammalian embryo. However, the shelled eggs produced by reptiles and birds are permeable to gases but not to liquids, which means soluble nitrogenous wastes released by an embryo would be trapped within the egg and could accumulate to dangerous levels (although urea is much less harmful than ammonia, it does become toxic at very high concentrations). In these animals natural selection apparently favored use of uric acid, which precipitates out of solution and can be stored within the egg as a harmless solid left behind when the animal hatches.

The type of nitrogenous waste produced by vertebrates depends on habitat as well as on evolutionary lineage. For example, terrestrial turtles (which often live in dry areas) excrete mainly uric acid, whereas aquatic turtles excrete both urea and ammonia. In some species, individuals can change their nitrogenous wastes when environmental conditions change. For example, certain tortoises that usually produce urea shift to uric acid production when temperature increases and water becomes less available. This is another example of how response to the environment occurs on two levels: Over generations, evolution determines the limits of physiological responses for a species, but during their lives individual organisms make adjustments within these evolutionary constraints.




