
 Sedimentary rocks are the richest source of fossils

Sedimentary rocks form from layers of minerals that settle out of water (see FIGURE 22.3). Sand and silt that are weathered and eroded from the land are carried by rivers to seas and swamps, where the particles settle to the bottom. Deposits pile up and compress the older sediments below into rock--sand into sandstone and mud into shale. When aquatic life-forms and terrestrial organisms swept into the seas and swamps die, they settle along with the sediments. A tiny fraction of them are then preserved as fossils. At any particular location, sedimentation is not continuous but occurs in intervals when the sea level changes or lakes and swamps dry up and refill. Even when a region is submerged, the rate of sedimentation and the types of sedimentary particles vary over time. As a result of these different periods of sedimentation, the rock forms in strata (see FIGURE 22.4).

The organic substances of a dead organism buried in sediments usually decay rapidly. However, hard parts that are rich in minerals, such as the shells of many invertebrates and protists and the bones and teeth of vertebrates, may remain as fossils (FIGURE 25.1a and b). Paleontologists have unearthed nearly complete skeletons of dinosaurs and other forms, but more often the finds consist of parts of skulls, bone fragments, or teeth. Many of these relics are hardened even more and preserved by chemical changes; under the right conditions, minerals dissolved in groundwater seep into the tissues of a dead organism and replace its organic material. The plant or animal turns to stone (see FIGURE 25.1c).

Rarer than mineralized fossils are those that retain organic material. They are sometimes discovered as thin films pressed between layers of sandstone or shale. For example, paleontologists have discovered plant leaves millions of years old that are still green with chlorophyll and well enough preserved for their organic composition to be analyzed and the ultrastructure of their cells to be explored with the electron microscope (see FIGURE 25.1d). The most common fossilized plant material is pollen, which has a hard organic case that resists degradation.

The fossils that paleontologists find in many of their digs are not the actual remnants of organisms at all, but rocks that form as replicas of the organisms. These fossils result when a dead organism captured in sediment decays and leaves an empty mold that becomes filled with minerals dissolved in water. The minerals may subsequently crystallize, forming a cast in the shape of the organism (see FIGURE 25.1e).

Trace fossils consist of footprints, animal burrows, or other impressions left in sediments by the activities of animals. These rocks are in essence fossilized behavior; they tell paleontologists something about how the animals that left the trace fossils lived. For example, dinosaur tracks provide clues about the animal's locomotion--its gait (pattern of leg movements), stride length, and speed (see FIGURE 25.1f).

If an organism happens to die in a place where bacteria and fungi cannot decompose the corpse, the entire body, including soft parts, may be preserved as a fossil. For example, the scorpion in FIGURE 25.1g got stuck in a drop of resin from a tree about 30 million years ago. The resin eventually hardened into amber, entombing the animal. There are other mechanisms that preserve whole organisms. Explorers have discovered mammoths, bison, and even prehistoric humans frozen in ice or preserved in acid bogs, where conditions retard decomposition (see FIGURE 25.1h). Such rare discoveries make the news, but biologists rely mainly on more common sedimentary fossils to reconstruct the history of life.




