
 The effect of selection on a varying characteristic can be directional, diversifying, or stabilizing

Natural selection can affect the frequency of a heritable trait in a population in three different ways, depending on which phenotypes in a varying population are favored. These three selection trends are directional selection, diversifying selection, and stabilizing selection (FIGURE 23.12).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 23-12. Modes of selection. These cases describe the possible microevolution of an imaginary deer mouse population in which there is quantitative variation in fur coloration from light to dark. The graphs show how the frequencies of individuals of varying darkness change over time. The large arrows symbolize natural selection working against certain phenotypes.

Directional selection is most common during periods of environmental change or when members of a population mi grate to some new habitat with different environmental conditions. Directional selection shifts the frequency curve for variations in some phenotypic character in one direction or the other by favoring what are initially relatively rare individuals that deviate from the average for that character. For instance, fossil evidence indicates that the average size of black bears in Europe increased with each glacial period of the ice ages, only to decrease again during the warmer interglacial periods. Over much shorter time intervals, Peter and Rosemary Grant documented directional evolution of beak size in a population of finches on Daphne Major in the Gal&aacute;pagos Islands (see interview on pages 426 -427). The medium ground finch (Geospiza fortis) uses its strong beak to crush seeds. Given a choice of small seeds or large seeds, the birds eat mostly small ones, which are easier to crush. During wet years, small seeds are produced in such abundance that ground finches consume relatively few large seeds. However, during dry years all seeds are in short supply, and the birds eat proportionally more large seeds. This change in diet is correlated with a change in the average depth (top-to-bottom dimension) of the birds' beaks in the subsequent generation. This trait is inherited rather than acquired (by exercising the beak on large seeds, for example). The most likely explanation is that those birds that happen to have stronger beaks have a feeding advantage and so have greater reproductive success during droughts. Thus, they pass the genes for thicker beaks on to their offspring (FIGURE 23.13).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 23-13. Directional selection for beak size in a Gal&aacute;pagos population of the medium ground finch.

Diversifying selection occurs when environmental conditions are varied in a way that favors individuals on both extremes of a phenotypic range over intermediate phenotypes (FIGURE 23.14).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 23-14. Diversifying selection in a finch population. Two distinctly different beak sizes occur in a single population of black-bellied seedcrackers, a species of finch that lives in Cameroon, West Africa. Small-billed individuals (left) feed mainly on soft seeds, whereas large-billed birds specialize in cracking hard seeds. A reasonable hypothesis is that natural selection selects against intermediate-sized bills, which crack both classes of seeds relatively inefficiently.

Stabilizing selection acts against extreme phenotypes and favors the more common intermediate variants. This mode of selection reduces variation and maintains the status quo for a particular phenotypic character. For example, stabilizing selection keeps the majority of human birth weights in the range of 3 - 4 kg. For babies much smaller or larger than this, infant mortality is greater.

Although we refer to these three selection trends as "modes of selection," the basic mechanism of natural selection is the same for each case. Selection favors certain heritable traits via differential reproductive success.




