
 Chemical or electrical communication between cells occurs at synapses

Synapses are unique cell junctions that control communication between a neuron and another cell. Synapses are found between two neurons, between sensory receptors and sensory neurons, between motor neurons and the muscle cells they control, and between neurons and gland cells. Here we focus on synapses between neurons, which usually conduct signals from an axon's synaptic terminals to dendrites or cell bodies of the next cells in a neural pathway. Synapses are of two types: electrical synapses and chemical synapses.

Electrical Synapses

An electrical synapse allows action potentials to spread directly from the presynaptic cell to the postsynaptic cell. The cells are connected by gap junctions (see FIGURE 7.30), intercellular channels that allow the local ion currents of an action potential to flow between neurons. The giant axons of lobsters and other crustaceans are connected end to end and coupled by electrical synapses. These make it possible for impulses to travel from neuron to neuron without delay and with no loss of signal strength. Electrical synapses in the central nervous systems of vertebrates synchronize the activity of neurons responsible for some rapid, stereotypical movements. For example, electrical synapses in the brain enable some fishes to flap their tail very rapidly when escaping from predators. However, chemical synapses are much more common than electrical synapses in vertebrates and most invertebrates.

Chemical Synapses

At a chemical synapse, a narrow gap, or synaptic cleft, separates the presynaptic cell from the postsynaptic cell. Because of the cleft, the cells are not electrically coupled, and an action potential occurring in the presynaptic cell cannot be transmitted directly to the membrane of the postsynaptic cell. Instead, a series of events converts the electrical signal of the action potential arriving at the synaptic terminal into a chemical signal that travels across the synapse, where it is converted back into an electrical signal in the postsynaptic cell.

The key to understanding the function of a chemical synapse is to examine its structure. The cytoplasm at the tip of the presynaptic axon contains numerous sacs called synaptic vesicles (FIGURE 48.12). Each vesicle contains thousands of molecules of a neurotransmitter, the substance that is released as an intercellular messenger into the synaptic cleft. Although many different neurotransmitters have been discovered in the nervous systems of animals, most neurons secrete only one kind of neurotransmitter. However, a single postsynaptic neuron may receive chemical signals from a variety of neurons that secrete different neurotransmitters from their synaptic terminals.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-12. A chemical synapse. When an action potential depolarizes the membrane of the synaptic terminal, it 1 triggers an influx of Ca2+ that 2 causes synaptic vesicles to fuse with the membrane of the presynaptic neuron. 3 The vesicles release neurotransmitter molecules into the synaptic cleft. These molecules diffuse across the cleft and bind to the receptors of ion channels embedded in the postsynaptic membrane. 4 The binding of neurotransmitter molecules to their specific receptors opens specific ion channels--Na+ channels, in the synapse illustrated here, causing a Na+ influx that depolarizes the postsynaptic membrane. 5 The neurotransmitter molecules are quickly degraded by enzymes or are taken up by another neuron, closing the ion channels and terminating the synaptic response.

A presynaptic neuron dispatches neurotransmitter molecules into the synapse when an action potential arrives at the synaptic terminal and depolarizes the presynaptic membrane, the surface of the synaptic terminal that faces the cleft. Calcium ions play a central role in this conversion of the electrical impulse into a chemical signal. Depolarization of the presynaptic membrane causes Ca2+ to rush into the neuron through voltage-gated channels. The sudden rise in the cytosolic concentration of Ca2+ stimulates the synaptic vesicles to fuse with the presynaptic membrane and spill the neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft by exocytosis (see Chapter 8). Thousands of vesicles may respond in unison to a single action potential. The neurotransmitter diffuses the short distance from the presynaptic membrane to the postsynaptic membrane, the plasma membrane of the cell body or dendrite on the other side of the synapse.

The postsynaptic membrane is specialized to receive the chemical message. Projecting from the extracellular surface of the membrane are proteins that function as specific receptors for neurotransmitters. The receptors are part of selective ion channels that open and close, controlling movements of ions across the postsynaptic membrane. A receptor is keyed to a particular type of neurotransmitter, and when it binds to this chemical, the gate of the ion channel opens, allowing specific ions, such as Na+, K+, or Cl-, to cross the membrane. Thus, the ion channels of the postsynaptic membrane are chemically gated, in contrast to the voltage-gated channels responsible for the action potential.

The ion movements resulting from the binding of neurotransmitter to its receptors alter the membrane potential of the postsynaptic cell. Depending on the type of receptors and the ion channels they control, neurotransmitters binding to the postsynaptic membrane may either depolarize or hyperpolarize the postsynaptic membrane. As we will soon see, depolarization and hyperpolarization have opposite effects on the activity of the postsynaptic neuron. In either case, the neurotransmitter is quickly removed, either by chemical breakdown or uptake into adjacent cells. This removal ensures that the effect of a neurotransmitter on a postsynaptic cell will be brief and precise, so that the next action potential arriving at the synapse will be transmitted. For example, the neurotransmitter known as acetylcholine is rapidly degraded by cholinesterase, an enzyme present in both the synaptic cleft and the postsynaptic membrane.

Note that one important function of the synapse is to allow nerve impulses to be transmitted only in a single direction over a neural pathway. Synaptic vesicles are present only in synaptic terminals, and thus only the presynaptic membrane can discharge neurotransmitters. And receptors are restricted to the postsynaptic membrane, ensuring that only this membrane can receive a chemical signal from another neuron.




