
 Enzymes speed up metabolic reactions by lowering energy barriers

A catalyst is a chemical agent that changes the rate of a reaction without being consumed by the reaction; an enzyme is a catalytic protein. (Another class of biological catalysts, ribozymes, made of RNA, is discussed in Chapters 17 and 26.) In the absence of enzymes, chemical traffic through the pathways of metabolism would become hopelessly congested. In the next two sections, we will see what impedes a spontaneous reaction and how an enzyme changes the situation.

The Activation Energy Barrier

Every chemical reaction between molecules involves both bond breaking and bond forming. For example, the hydrolysis of sucrose involves first breaking the bond between glucose and fructose and then forming new bonds with a hydrogen and a hydroxyl group from water (see FIGURE 6.11). Whenever a reaction rearranges the atoms of molecules, existing bonds in the reactants must be broken and the new bonds of the products formed. The reactant molecules must absorb energy from their surroundings for their bonds to break, and energy is released when the new bonds of the product molecules are formed.

The initial investment of energy for starting a reaction--the energy required to break bonds in the reactant molecules--is known as the free energy of activation, or activation energy, abbreviated EA in this book. It is usually provided in the form of heat that the reactant molecules absorb from the surroundings. The bonds of the reactants break only when the molecules have absorbed enough energy to become unstable. (Recall that systems rich in free energy are unstable, and unstable systems are reactive.) The absorption of thermal energy increases the speed of the reactant molecules, so they are colliding more often and more forcefully. Also, thermal agitation of the atoms in the molecules makes the bonds more likely to break. As the molecules settle into their new, more stable bonding arrangements, energy is released to the surroundings. If the reaction is exergonic, EA will be repaid with dividends, as the formation of new bonds releases more energy than was invested in the breaking of old bonds.

We can think of activation energy as the amount of energy needed to push the reactants over an energy barrier, or hill, so that the "downhill" part of the reaction can begin. FIGURE 6.12 graphs the energy changes for a hypothetical exergonic reaction that swaps portions of two reactant molecules:  The energizing, or activation, of the reactants is represented by the uphill portion of the graph, with the free-energy content of the reactant molecules increasing. At the summit, the reactants are in an unstable condition known as the transition state: They are activated, and the breaking and making of bonds can occur. The bond-forming phase of the reaction corresponds to the downhill part of the curve, which shows the loss of free energy by the molecules. The difference between the free energy of the products and the free energy of the reactants is DG for the overall reaction. Because this is an exergonic reaction, DG is negative.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 6-12. Energy profile of an exergonic reaction. The "molecules" are hypothetical, with A, B, C, and D representing parts of actual molecules. Using the reaction in FIGURE 6.11 as an example, you can imagine that AB = sucrose (glucose monomer--fructose monomer), CD = water (with C = hydroxyl group and D = hydrogen), AC = glucose, and BD = fructose.

As FIGURE 6.12 shows, even for an exergonic reaction, which is energetically downhill overall, the barrier of activation energy must be scaled before the reaction can occur. For some reactions, EA is modest enough that even at room temperature there is sufficient thermal energy for many of the reactants to reach the transition state. In most cases, however, the EA barrier is loftier, and the reaction will occur at a noticeable rate only if the reactants are heated. The spark plugs in an automobile engine energize the gasoline-oxygen mixture so that the molecules reach the transition state and react; only then can there be the explosive release of energy that pushes the pistons. Without a spark, the hydrocarbons of gasoline are too stable to react with oxygen.

Enzymes and Activation Energy

The barrier of activation energy is essential to life. Proteins, DNA, and other complex molecules of the cell are rich in free energy and have the potential to decompose spontaneously; that is, the laws of thermodynamics favor their breakdown. These molecules exist only because at temperatures typical for cells, few molecules can make it over the hump of activation energy. Occasionally, however, the barrier for selected reactions must be surmounted, or else the cell would be metabolically stagnant. Heat speeds a reaction, but high temperature denatures proteins and kills cells. Organisms must therefore use an alternative: a catalyst.

An enzyme speeds a reaction by lowering the EA barrier (FIGURE 6.13), so that the precipice of the transition state is within reach even at moderate temperatures. An enzyme cannot change the DG for a reaction; it cannot make an endergonic reaction exergonic. Enzymes can only hasten reactions that would occur eventually anyway, but this function makes it possible for the cell to have a dynamic metabolism. And because enzymes are very selective in the reactions they catalyze, they determine which chemical processes will be going on in the cell at any particular time.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 6-13. Enzymes lower the barrier of activation energy. Without affecting the free-energy change (DG) for the reaction, an enzyme speeds the reaction by reducing the uphill climb to the transition state. The black curve shows the course of the reaction without an enzyme; the red curve shows the course of the reaction with an enzyme.




