
 Class Amphibia: Salamanders, frogs, and caecilians are the three extant amphibian orders

Today the amphibians (class Amphibia) are represented by a total of about 4,800 species of salamanders (order Urodela, which means "tailed ones"), frogs (order Anura,"tail-less ones"), and caecilians (order Apoda, meaning "legless ones," describing the wormlike bodies of these amphibians).

There are only about 500 species of urodeles. Some are entirely aquatic, but others live on land as adults or throughout life (FIGURE 34.17a). Most salamanders that live on land walk with a side-to-side bending of the body that may resemble the swagger of the early terrestrial tetrapods.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-17. Amphibian orders. (a) Order Urodela. Urodeles (salamanders) retain their tails as adults. Some are entirely aquatic, but others live on land. This is a spotted salamander. (b) Order Anura. Anurans, such as this poison arrow frog, lack tails as adults. Poison arrow frogs inhabit tropical forests; their skin glands secrete deadly nerve toxins used by Central and South American natives to coat arrow tips. (c) Order Apoda. Apodans, also called caecilians, are legless, mainly burrowing amphibians.

Anurans, numbering nearly 4,200 species, are more specialized than urodeles for moving on land (FIGURE 34.17b). Adult frogs use their powerful hind legs to hop along the terrain. A frog nabs insects by flicking out its long sticky tongue, which is attached to the front of the mouth. Frogs display a great variety of adaptations that help them avoid being eaten by larger predators. In common with other amphibians, many frogs exhibit color patterns that camouflage. The skin glands of frogs secrete distasteful, or even poisonous, mucus. Many poisonous species have bright coloration that apparently warns predators, who associate the coloration with danger.

Apodans, the caecilians (about 150 species), are legless and nearly blind, and superficially resemble earthworms (FIGURE 34.17c). The reduction of legs evolved secondarily from a legged ancestor. Caecilians inhabit tropical areas where most species burrow in moist forest soil. A few South American apodans live in freshwater ponds and streams.

Amphibian means "two lives," a reference to the metamorphosis of many frogs (FIGURE 34.18). The tadpole, the larval stage of a frog, is usually an aquatic herbivore with gills, a lateral line system resembling that of fishes, and a long finned tail. The tadpole lacks legs and swims by undulating like its fishlike ancestors. During the metamorphosis that leads to the "second life," legs develop, and the gills and lateral line system disappear. The young frog with air-breathing lungs, a pair of external eardrums, and a digestive system adapted to a carnivorous diet crawls onto shore and begins life as a terrestrial hunter. In spite of the name amphibian, however, many frogs do not go through the aquatic tadpole stage, and many amphibians do not live a dualistic--aquatic and terrestrial--life. There are some strictly aquatic and strictly terrestrial frogs, salamanders, and caecilians. Moreover, salamander and caecilian larvae look much like adults, and typically both the larvae and the adults are carnivorous. Paedomorphosis is common among some groups of salamanders; the mudpuppy (Necturus), for instance, retains gills and other larval features when sexually mature (see FIGURE 24.21).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-18. The "dual life" of a frog (Rana temporaria). (a) The male grasps the female, stimulating her to release eggs. The eggs are laid and fertilized in water. They have a jelly coat but lack shells and would desiccate in air. (b) The tadpole is an aquatic herbivore with a fishlike tail and internal gills. (c) During metamorphosis, the gills and tail are resorbed, and walking legs develop.

Most amphibians maintain close ties with water and are most abundant in damp habitats such as swamps and rain forests. Even those frogs that are adapted to drier habitats spend much of their time in burrows or under moist leaves, where the humidity is high. Most amphibians rely heavily on their moist skin to carry out gas exchange with the environment. Some terrestrial species lack lungs and breathe exclusively through their skin and oral cavity.

Amphibian eggs lack a shell and dehydrate quickly in dry air. Fertilization is external in most species, with the male grasping the female and spilling his sperm over the eggs as the female sheds them (see FIGURE 34.18a). Amphibians generally lay their eggs in ponds or swamps or at least in moist environments. Some species lay vast numbers of eggs in temporary pools, and mortality is high. In contrast, some species display various types of parental care and lay relatively few eggs. Depending on the species, either males or females may house eggs on their back, in the mouth, or even in the stomach. Certain tropical tree frogs stir their egg masses into moist foamy nests that resist drying. There are also some ovoviviparous and viviparous species that retain the eggs in the female reproductive tract, where embryos can develop without drying out.

Many amphibians exhibit complex and diverse social behavior, especially during their breeding seasons. Frogs are usually quiet creatures, but many species fill the air with their mating calls during the breeding season. Males may vocalize to defend breeding territory or to attract females. In some terrestrial species, migrations to specific breeding sites may involve vocal communication, celestial navigation, or chemical signaling.

For the past 25 years, zoologists have been documenting a rapid and alarming decline in amphibian populations throughout the world. The causes may be multiple, including environmental degradation and spread of a pathogen, a chytrid fungus. The environmental assaults include acid precipitation, which is especially damaging to amphibians because of their dependence on wet places for completing their life cycles.




