
 Phloem translocates its sap from sugar sources to sugar sinks

In contrast to the unidirectional transport of xylem sap from roots to leaves, the direction that phloem sap travels is variable. The one generalization that holds is that sieve tubes carry food from a sugar source to a sugar sink. A sugar source is a plant organ in which sugar is being produced by either photosynthesis or the breakdown of starch. Mature leaves are the primary sugar sources. A sugar sink is an organ that is a net consumer or storer of sugar. Growing roots, shoot tips, stems, and fruit are sugar sinks supplied by phloem. A storage organ, such as a tuber or a bulb, may be either a source or a sink, depending on the season. When the storage organ is stockpiling carbohydrates during the summer, it is a sugar sink. After breaking dormancy in the early spring, however, the storage organ becomes a source as its starch is broken down to sugar, which is carried away in the phloem to the growing buds of the shoot system.

Other solutes may be transported to sinks along with sugar. For example, minerals that reach leaves in xylem may later be transferred in the phloem to developing fruit.

A sugar sink usually receives its sugar from the sources nearest to it. The upper leaves on a branch may send sugar to the growing shoot tip, whereas the lower leaves on the same branch export sugar to roots. A growing fruit requires so much food that it may monopolize the sugar sources all around it. One sieve tube in a vascular bundle may carry phloem sap in one direction while sap in a different tube in the same bundle flows in the opposite direction. For each sieve tube, the direction of transport depends only on the locations of the source and sink connected by that tube. This direction may change with the season or developmental stage of the plant.

Phloem Loading and Unloading

Sugar from the mesophyll cells of a leaf and other sources must be loaded into sieve-tube members before it can be exported to sugar sinks. In some species, sucrose moves all the way from mesophyll cells to sieve-tube members via the symplast, passing from cell to cell through plasmodesmata. In other species, sucrose reaches sieve-tube members by a combination of symplastic and apoplastic pathways (FIGURE 36.16a). For example, in corn leaves, sucrose diffuses through the symplast from mesophyll cells into small veins. Much of the sugar then moves out of the cells into the apoplast (walls) in the vicinity of sieve-tube members and companion cells. This sucrose is accumulated from the apoplast (walls) directly by the sieve-tube members or by their companion cells. Companion cells pass the sugar they accumulate into the sieve-tube members through plasmodesmata linking the cells. In some plants, companion cells have numerous ingrowths of their walls, an adaptation that increases the cells' surface area and enhances the transfer of solutes between apoplast and symplast. Such modified cells are called transfer cells (see FIGURE 29.5).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 36-16. Loading of sucrose into phloem.

In corn and many other plants, sieve-tube members accumulate sucrose to concentrations two to three times higher than concentrations in mesophyll, and thus phloem loading requires active transport. Proton pumps do the work that enables the cells to accumulate sucrose (FIGURE 36.16b).

Downstream, at the sink end of a sieve tube, phloem unloads its sucrose. Phloem unloading is a highly variable process; its mechanism depends on the plant species and the type of organ. Regardless of its exact mechanism, the concentration of free sugar in the sink is lower than that in the sieve tube because the unloaded sugar is either consumed during growth and metabolism of the sink cells or is converted into insoluble polymers such as starch. As a result of this sugar concentration gradient, sugar molecules diffuse from the phloem into the sink tissues, and water follows by osmosis.




