
 Plant organs are composed of three tissue systems: dermal, vascular, and ground

Each organ of a plant--leaf, stem, or root--has three tissue systems: the dermal, vascular, and ground tissue systems. Each tissue system is continuous throughout the plant body, although the specific characteristics of the tissues and their spatial relationships to one another vary in different organs of the plant (FIGURE 35.7). Here we survey the three tissue systems as they occur in a young, nonwoody plant.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-7. The three tissue systems. The dermal tissue system--epidermis (white) in the case of a young, nonwoody organ--is a single layer of cells that covers the entire body of a young plant. The vascular tissue system (purple) is also continuous throughout the plant, but is arranged differently in each organ. The ground tissue system (yellow), responsible for most of the plant's metabolic functions, is located between the dermal tissue and the vascular tissue in each organ.

The dermal tissue, or epidermis, is generally a single layer of tightly packed cells that covers and protects all young parts of the plant--the "skin" of the plant. In addition to the general function of protection, the epidermis has more specialized characteristics consistent with the function of the particular organ it covers. For example, the root hairs so important in the absorption of water and minerals are extensions of epidermal cells near the tips of roots. The epidermis of leaves and most stems secretes a waxy coating called the cuticle that helps the aerial parts of the plant retain water--an important adaptation to living on land (see p. 581).

Vascular tissue, continuous throughout the plant, is involved in the transport of materials between roots and shoots. The two types of vascular tissue are xylem, which conveys water and dissolved minerals upward from roots into the shoots, and phloem, which transports food made in mature leaves to the roots and to nonphotosynthetic parts of the shoot system, such as developing leaves and fruits. Both xylem and phloem are composed of a variety of cell types, but those directly involved in long-distance transport are so highly modified as to warrant special discussion.

The water-conducting elements of xylem, the tracheids and vessel elements, are elongated cells that are dead at functional maturity. The term functional maturity refers to the stage in a cell's development when it is fully specialized for its function. When the living interior of a tracheid or vessel element disintegrates, the cell's thickened cell walls remain behind, forming a nonliving conduit through which water can flow (FIGURE 35.8). Both tracheids and vessels form in parts of the plant that are no longer elongating. Their secondary walls are interrupted only by pits, thinner regions where only primary walls are present (see FIGURE 7.28 to review primary and secondary walls). Tracheids are long, thin cells with tapered ends. Water moves from cell to cell mainly through the pits, where the water does not have to cross thick secondary walls. Because their secondary walls are hardened with lignin, tracheids function in support as well as water transport. Vessel elements are generally wider, shorter, thinner walled, and less tapered than tracheids. Vessel elements are aligned end to end, forming long micropipes, the xylem vessels. The end walls of vessel elements are perforated, enabling water to flow freely through xylem vessels.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-8. Water-conducting cells of xylem. Arrows indicate the flow of water. (a) Tracheids are spindle-shaped cells with pits through which water flows from cell to cell.
(b) Vessel elements are linked together end to end, forming long tubes, or xylem vessels. Water streams from cell to cell through perforated end walls. Water can also migrate laterally between neighboring vessels through pits.
(c) Wood is composed mostly of tracheids and vessels (SEM).

In the phloem, sucrose, other organic compounds, and some mineral ions are transported through tubes formed by chains of cells called sieve-tube members (FIGURE 35.9). Sieve-tube members are alive at functional maturity, although they lack such organelles as the nucleus, ribosomes, and a distinct vacuole. In angiosperms, the end walls between sieve-tube members, called sieve plates, have pores that presumably facilitate the flow of fluid from cell to cell along the sieve tube. Alongside each sieve-tube member is a nonconducting cell called a companion cell, which is connected to the sieve-tube member by numerous channels, the plasmodesmata (see FIGURE 7.8). The nucleus and ribosomes of the companion cell may serve not only that cell but also the adjacent sieve-tube member, which has no nucleus or ribosomes of its own. In some plants, companion cells in leaves also help load sugar produced in the leaf into the sieve-tube members. The phloem then transports the sugar to other parts of the plant.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-9. Food-conducting cells of the phloem. Sieve-tube members transport a sugar-rich sap from areas of sugar production (such as leaves) to areas of sugar consumption (such as growing root and shoot tips). (a) This diagram of a longitudinal view shows how the sieve-tube members are arranged end to end with porous walls (sieve plates) between them. Alongside each sieve-tube member is a nucleated companion cell. (b) A transverse section showing two sieve-tube members sectioned through sieve plates.

Ground tissue is tissue that is neither dermal tissue nor vascular tissue (see FIGURE 35.7). In dicot stems, ground tissue is divided into pith, internal to the vascular tissue, and cortex, external to the vascular tissue. Ground tissue is more than just filler; among its diverse functions are photosynthesis, storage, and support. In fact, ground tissue illustrates the point that each tissue system of a plant consists of a variety of cell types. The cortex of a dicot stem, for example, typically consists of both fleshy storage cells and thick-walled support cells. All plant tissues consist of a variety of the three basic plant cell types that we discuss in the next section.




