
 Diplomonadida and Parabasala: Diplomonads and parabasalids lack mitochondria

A few protistan groups lack mitochondria. Two of these groups are the diplomonads and the parabasalids. According to what is called the "archaezoa hypothesis," these protists are the modern forms of ancient eukaryotic lineages that evolved before the acquisition of the endosymbiotic bacteria that gave rise to mitochondria. Most protistan systematists have recently rejected that hypothesis based on the discovery of mitochondrial genes in the nuclear genomes of the diplomonads and parabasalids. In other words, the evidence now supports the hypothesis that these protists lost their mitochondria during their evolution from ancestors in which mitochondria were present. However, other details of cell structure combined with data from molecular systematics still place the diplomonads and parabasalids on the phylogenetic branch that diverged earliest in eukaryotic history (see FIGURE 28.8).

The diplomonads have multiple flagella, two separate nuclei, a relatively simple cytoskeleton (compared with other eukaryotes), no plastids, and, as already pointed out, no mitochondria. An infamous example is Giardia lamblia, a parasite that infects the human intestine, causing abdominal cramps and severe diarrhea (FIGURE 28.9). People most often pick up Giardia by drinking water contaminated with human feces containing the parasite in a dormant cyst stage. Drinking such water from what seems like a pristine stream or river can ruin a camping trip. Boiling drinking water kills the cysts.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 28-9. Giardia lamblia, a diplomnad (colorized SEM).

The parabasalids, another group lacking mitochondria, include the protists called trichomonads. The best known species is Trichomonas vaginalis, a common inhabitant of the vagina of human females. It can proliferate and infect the vaginal lining by overcoming beneficial microbial populations if the normal acidity of the vagina is disturbed. Such infections also occur in the urethras of males, though often without symptoms. Sexual transmission can spread the infection. Note in FIGURE 28.10 that T. vaginalis has both flagella and an undulating membrane, structures that enable these protists to move along the mucus-coated skin within the reproductive and urinary tracts of their human hosts.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 28-10. Trichomonas vaginalis, a parabasalid (colorized SEM).




