
Chapter 38: PLANT REPRODUCTION AND BIOTECHNOLOGY

SEXUAL REPRODUCTION

   Sporophyte and gametophyte generations alternate in the life cycles of plants: a review

   Flowers are specialized shoots bearing the reproductive organs of the angiosperm sporophyte

   Male and female gametophytes develop within anthers and ovaries, respectively: Pollination brings them together

   Plants have various mechanisms that prevent self-fertilization

   Double fertilization gives rise to the zygote and endosperm

   The ovule develops into a seed containing an embryo and a supply of nutrients

   The ovary develops into a fruit adapted for seed dispersal

   Evolutionary adaptations of seed germination contribute to seedling survival



ASEXUAL REPRODUCTION

   Many plants clone themselves by asexual reproduction

   Sexual and asexual reproduction are complementary in the life histories of many plants

   Vegetative propagation of plants is common in agriculture



PLANT BIOTECHNOLOGY

   Neolithic humans created new plant varieties by artificial selection

   Biotechnology is transforming agriculture

   Plant biotechnology has incited much public debate

It has been said that an oak is an acorn's way of making more acorns. Indeed, in a Darwinian view of life, the fitness of an organism is measured only by its ability to replace itself with healthy, fertile offspring. Consider the century plant (Agave) in the photograph on this page. It lives for decades without flowering, and then one spring it grows a floral stalk as tall as a telephone pole. That season the plant produces seeds and then withers and dies, its food reserves, minerals, and water spent in the formation of its massive bloom. Although not all flowering plants are as completely consumed as the century plant in leaving offspring, most of their other functions--for example, photosynthesis and growth--can be interpreted, in the broadest Darwinian sense, as mechanisms contributing to propagation. Sexual reproduction, as in the case of oak and Agave, however, is not the sole means by which flowering plants reproduce: Many species can also reproduce asexually, creating offspring that are genetically identical to themselves.

In Chapters 29 and 30, we approached plant reproduction from an evolutionary perspective, tracing the descent of angiosperms and other land plants from their aquatic ancestors, charophycean algae. In this chapter, we explore the reproductive biology of flowering plants (angiosperms) in much greater detail because they are the most important group of plants in most terrestrial ecosystems and in agriculture. In addition to examining both sexual and asexual reproduction of angiosperms, we will place plant biotechnology in the broader context of human intervention in the propagation and genetics of the angiosperm varieties we have been cultivating for millennia.




