
 The phenotypic effects of some mammaliangenes depend on whether they were inheritedfrom the mother or the father (imprinting)

Throughout our discussions of Mendelian genetics and the chromosomal basis of inheritance, we have assumed that a specific allele will have the same effect regardless of whether it was inherited from the mother or the father. This is probably a safe assumption most of the time. For example, when Mendel crossed purple-flowered peas with white-flowered peas, he observed the same results regardless of whether the purple-flowered parent supplied the ova or pollen. In recent years, however, geneticists have identified some traits in mammals, including certain inherited disorders in humans, that depend on which parent passed along the alleles for those traits. (Note that the issue here is not sex linkage; the genes involved may or may not lie on the X chromosome.)

Consider the two disorders called Prader-Willi syndrome and Angelman syndrome. The symptoms are different. Prader-Willi syndrome is characterized by mental retardation, obesity, short stature, and unusually small hands and feet. People with Angelman syndrome exhibit spontaneous (uncontrollable) laughter, jerky movements, and other motor and mental symptoms. For both disorders, the genetic cause seems to be the same: deletion of a particular segment of chromosome 15. If a child inherits the abnormal chromosome from the father, the result is Prader-Willi syndrome. If the abnormal chromosome is inherited from the mother, the result is Angelman syndrome. It appears that the genes of the deleted region normally behave differently in offspring, depending on whether they belong to the maternal or the paternal chromosome.

A process called genomic imprinting can explain the Prader-Willi/Angelman enigma and some similar phenomena. In this process, a gene on one chromosome is somehow silenced, while its allele on the homologous chromosome is left free to be expressed. In mammals, certain genes are imprinted in some way in each generation, with the imprinting status of a given gene depending on whether the gene resides in a female or in a male (FIGURE 15.15). In other words, the same alleles may have different effects on offspring, depending on whether they arrive in the zygote via the ovum or via the sperm. In the new generation, both maternal and paternal imprints are apparently "erased" in gamete-producing cells, and all the chromosomes are reimprinted according to the sex of the individual in which they now reside.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 15-15. Genomic imprinting. The sperm and ova of mammals convey chromosomes that are differently imprinted. The phenotypic effect of a particular allele in an offspring may therefore depend on whether the allele came from the mother or the father. In each generation, the old imprints are "erased" when sperm or ova are produced, and all the chromosomes are newly imprinted according to the sex of the individual.

What exactly is a genomic imprint? In many cases, it seems to consist of methyl (--CH3) groups that are added to cytosine nucleotides of one of the alleles. The hypothesis that this methylation directly silences the allele is consistent with evidence that heavily methylated genes are usually inactive (see p. 363) and suggests that in these cases, the animal uses the allele that is not imprinted. But in other cases of imprinting, the absence of methylation in the vicinity of an allele plays a role in silencing it, whereas methylation does occur near the active allele on the homologous chromosome. Researchers are trying to work out the mechanisms involved.

Researchers have so far identified about 20 mammalian genes subject to imprinting, and there may be a couple of hundred more. Most of the known imprinted genes are critical for embryonic development. In experiments with mice, embryos engineered to inherit both copies of certain chromosomes from the same parent inevitably die before birth, whether that parent is male or female. Normal development apparently requires that certain genes have exactly one active copy--not zero, not two.

In humans, in addition to the Prader-Willi/Angelman case, genomic imprinting may help explain the inheritance pattern of other disorders, including one called fragile X syndrome. This disorder is named for the physical appearance of an abnormal X chromosome, the tip of which hangs on to the rest of the chromosome by a thin thread of DNA. Children with fragile X syndrome--about one in every 1,500 males and one in every 2,500 females--are mentally retarded. Of all forms of mental retardation with a genetic basis, fragile X is the most common.

Inheritance of fragile X has a complex pattern, but the syndrome is more common when the abnormal chromosome is inherited from the mother rather than the father. This is consistent with the disorder being more common in males: If a male (XY) inherits a fragile X chromosome, it has to be from his mother. The fragile X case is one in which imprinting (methylation) of the abnormal allele by the mother somehow causes (rather than "silences") the syndrome. An unusual molecular characteristic of this abnormal allele will be described in Chapter 19.




