
 Human activities may be causing climate change by increasing carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere

Many human activities release a variety of gaseous waste products. We once thought that the vastness of the atmosphere could absorb these materials without significant consequences, but we now know that the finite volume of the atmosphere means that human intrusions can cause fundamental changes in its composition and its interactions with the rest of the biosphere. One pressing problem is the rising level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.

Rising Atmospheric CO2

Since the Industrial Revolution, the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere has been increasing as a result of the combustion of fossil fuels and the burning of enormous quantities of wood removed by deforestation. Various methods of measurement have estimated that the average carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere before 1850 was about 274 parts per million (ppm). When a monitoring station on Hawaii's Mauna Loa peak began making very accurate measurements in 1958, the CO2 concentration was 316 ppm (FIGURE 54.26). Today, the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere exceeds 370 ppm, an increase of about 14%  since the measurements began. If CO2 emissions continue to increase at the present rate, by the year 2075, the atmospheric concentration of this gas will be double what it was at the start of the Industrial Revolution.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 54-26. The increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide and average temperatures from 1958 to 2000. In addition to normal seasonal fluctuations in CO2 levels, this graph shows a steady increase in the total amount of CO2 in the atmosphere (black). These measurements are being taken at a relatively remote site in Hawaii, where the air is free from the variable short-term effects that occur near large urban areas. Though average temperatures over the same time period fluctuate a great deal (red), there is a warming trend. Climatologists predict that temperatures could rise about 2&#176;C over the next 100 years if atmospheric CO2 levels continue to rise at the current rate.

An increased productivity by vegetation is one predictable consequence of increasing CO2 levels. In fact, when CO2 concentrations are raised in experimental chambers such as greenhouses, most plants respond with increased growth. However, because C3 plants are more limited than C4 plants by CO2 availability (see Chapter 10), one effect of increasing CO2 concentrations on a global scale may be the spread of C3 species into terrestrial habitats previously favoring C4 plants. This may have important agricultural implications. For example, corn, a C4 plant and the most important grain crop in the United States, may be replaced on farms by wheat and soybeans, C3 crops that will outproduce corn in a CO2-enriched environment. However, it is not yet possible to predict accurately the gradual and complex effects that rising CO2 levels will have on species composition in nonagricultural communities.

The Greenhouse Effect

One factor that complicates predictions about the long-term effects of rising atmospheric CO2 concentration is its possible influence on Earth's heat budget. Much of the solar radiation that strikes the planet is reflected back into space. Although CO2 and water vapor in the atmosphere are transparent to visible light, they intercept and absorb much of the reflected infrared radiation, re-reflecting some of it back toward Earth. This process retains some of the solar heat. If it were not for this greenhouse effect, the average air temperature at Earth's surface would be -18&#176;C, and most life as we know it could not exist. The marked increase in atmospheric CO2 concentrations during the last 150 years concerns many ecologists and environmentalists because of its potential to increase global temperature.

Global Warming

Scientists continue to construct mathematical models in attempts to predict how increasing levels of atmospheric CO2 will affect global temperatures. To date, no models are sophisticated enough to include all the biotic and abiotic factors that can influence atmospheric gas concentrations and temperature (for example, cloud cover, CO2 uptake by photosynthetic organisms, and the effects of particles in the air). However, a number of studies predict a doubling of CO2 concentration by the end of the twenty-first century and an associated average temperature increase of about 2&#176;C. Supporting these models is a correlation between CO2 levels and temperatures in prehistoric times. Climatologists can actually measure CO2 levels in bubbles trapped in glacial ice at different times in Earth's history. Prehistoric temperatures are inferred by several methods, including analysis of past vegetation based on fossils.

An increase of only 1.3&#176;C would make the world warmer than at any time in the past 100,000 years. A worst-case scenario suggests that the warming would be greatest near the poles; the resultant melting of polar ice might raise sea level by an estimated 100 m, gradually flooding coastal areas 150 km (or more) inland from the current coastline. New York, Miami, Los Angeles, and many other cities would then be under water. A warming trend would also alter the geographic distribution of precipitation, making major agricultural areas of the central United States much drier. However, the various mathematical models disagree about the details of how climate in each region will be affected. By studying how past periods of global warming and cooling affected plant communities, ecologists are trying to predict the consequences of future temperature changes. Analysis of fossilized pollen provides evidence that plant communities change dramatically with changes in temperature. Past climate changes occurred gradually, and plant and animal populations could migrate into areas where abiotic conditions allowed them to survive. A major concern is the projected high rates of climate change--by some estimates, higher than at any time in the past 10,000 years. Many organisms, especially plants that cannot disperse rapidly over long distances, will probably not be able to survive such rapid changes.

Coal, natural gas, gasoline, wood, and other organic fuels central to modern life cannot be burned without releasing CO2. The apparent warming of the planet that is now under way as a result of the addition of CO2 to the atmosphere is a problem of uncertain consequences and no simple solutions. Given the importance of combustion to our increasingly industrialized societies, stabilizing CO2 emissions will require concerted international effort and the acceptance of dramatic changes in both personal lifestyles and industrial processes. Many ecologists believe that this effort suffered a major setback in 2001, when the United States pulled out of the Kyoto Protocol, a 1997 pledge by the industrialized nations to reduce their CO2 output by about 5%  over a ten-year period.




