
 Networks of neurons with intricate connections form nervous systems

Neuron Structure and Synapses

The structural and functional unit of the nervous system is the neuron, or nerve cell (FIGURE 48.2a). A neuron has a cell body, which contains the nucleus and other organelles, and it has fiberlike processes (extensions) of two general types. Dendrites (from the Greek dendron, tree) are short, highly branched processes that receive incoming messages from other cells and carry this information as an electrical signal toward the cell body. Axons, usually much longer than dendrites, convey outgoing messages from the neuron to other cells. Some axons, such as the ones connecting your spinal cord to your foot, can be over a meter long. The conical region of the axon where it joins the cell body is called the axon hillock; this region plays an essential role in the transmission and integration of nerve signals. Many axons are enclosed by an insulating layer called the myelin sheath. The supporting cells that form this sheath are described later in this section.

Axons have specialized endings called synaptic terminals, which relay signals from the neuron to other cells by releasing chemical messengers called neurotransmitters. The site of contact between a synaptic terminal and a target cell is called a synapse (FIGURE 48.2b). The target cell may be either another neuron or an effector, such as a muscle cell or gland cell. The transmitting cell is called the presynaptic cell, and the target cell is called the postsynaptic cell. An axon may be branched, and each branch may give rise to hundreds or thousands of synaptic terminals.

A Simple Nerve Circuit--the Reflex Arc

The simplest type of nerve circuit regulates a reflex, or automatic response, and is called a reflex arc. For example, this is the type of circuit that causes a clam to shut its shell when a shadow (which might be a potential predator) passes overhead.

The simplest reflex arcs require only two kinds of nerve cells. A sensory neuron receives information from a sensory receptor about a change in a stimulus such as light, pressure, or sound and passes this information on to a motor neuron. In turn, the motor neuron signals an effector cell, a muscle cell or gland cell that carries out the response. FIGURE 48.3 illustrates this sequence in the human knee-jerk reflex, the one that makes your leg jerk forward when the doctor hits your kneecap with a small hammer. The sudden, unexpected stretching of the tendon attached to the quadriceps (the front thigh muscle) is sensed by a specialized sensory neuron in the quadriceps. This sensory neuron signals a motor neuron to quickly counter the stretch by commanding the quadriceps to contract, causing your leg to jerk forward slightly.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-3. The knee-jerk reflex. For simplicity, only one neuron of each type is shown here, but actually many neurons are involved in the knee-jerk reflex.

Actually, our knee-jerk reflex involves more than this simple sensory/motor circuit. Contraction of the front thigh muscle is accompanied by inhibition of the back thigh muscles that flex the lower leg (pull it toward the body), and this inhibition involves a second nerve circuit. The sensory neurons from the quadriceps form synapses not only with motor neurons but also with interneurons in the spinal cord. In turn, these interneurons inhibit motor neurons to the flexor muscles, preventing them from contracting.

Most nerve circuits include large collections of interneurons that intervene between sensory receptors and effector cells to organize or integrate the most appropriate behaviors. Even in the simplest animals, most interneurons are constantly active, essentially "talking" to themselves. This continuous internal "conversation" within the CNS provides context for interpreting sensory input and directing an appropriate action in response. The large collections of interneurons that make up vertebrate brains, particularly human brains, bring an ongoing history to bear on what action is taken. If, for example, you decide that you don't want your knee to jerk forward when a doctor taps it with the hammer, interneurons passing from your brain to the spinal cord segment shown in FIGURE 48.3 can inhibit that reflex.

The cell bodies of motor neurons and interneurons are generally located in the gray matter of the central nervous system; the gray matter of the spinal cord is shown in FIGURE 48.3. The outer white matter in the spinal cord consists of motor and sensory axons. Notice, however, that the cell body of the sensory neuron in FIGURE 48.3 is located outside the spinal cord in a structure called the dorsal root ganglion. A ganglion (plural, ganglia) is a cluster of nerve cell bodies, often of similar function, located in the peripheral nervous system. Similar clusters within vertebrate brains are called nuclei (not to be confused with the nuclei of individual cells).

Adapted for different functions, sensory neurons, motor neurons, and interneurons differ markedly in shape, and there is also a variety of shapes within each class. Examples of this structured diversity are shown in FIGURE 48.4. A nervous system involves the coordinated activity of tens of thousands to billions of these diverse nerve cells.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-4. Structural diversity of neurons. These examples illustrate some of the variety in neuron shape. Cell bodies and dendrites are black; axons are magenta. (a) Vertebrate sensory neuron. The short, multibranched dendrites communicate with sensory receptor cells. A single, long axon, which is usually myelinated, conveys signals from the dendrites to synapses with neurons in the CNS. The cell body is connected only to the axon. This configuration is markedly different from that of the neuron in FIGURE 48.2a, which is a vertebrate motor neuron. (b) Two types of interneurons found in the mammalian brain. The top one has multiple dendrites and a branched axon; the bottom one has finely branched, meshlike dendrites. (c) An invertebrate motor neuron. In contrast to the vertebrate motor neuron in FIGURE 48.2a, the cell body connects only to the dendrites.

Types of Nerve Circuits

Nerve circuits show three basic patterns of organization. One kind of circuit takes information from a single source, such as an eye, to several parts of the brain; in this case the information from a single presynaptic neuron spreads out to several postsynaptic neurons. In a second kind of circuit, information from several presynaptic neurons converges at a single postsynaptic neuron. The convergent circuits can bring together information from several sources, such as vision, touch, and hearing, to identify an object in the environment. In a third type of circuit, information flows in a circular path, from one neuron to others and then back to its source. In the human brain, memories may be processed via circular paths and eventually stored.

Supporting Cells (Glia)

Supporting cells, or glia (from the Greek, glue) are essential for the structural integrity of the nervous system and for the normal functioning of neurons. Glia outnumber neurons tenfold to fiftyfold. Until recently, researchers assumed that glia play a supportive role without actually participating in nerve signaling. However, recent studies have suggested that some synaptic interactions do occur between glia and neurons.

There are several types of glia in the brain and spinal cord, and as a group these cells do much more than simply glue neurons together. In the developing embryo, supporting cells called radial glia form tracks along which neurons migrate or grow out from the neural tube, the structure that gives rise to the CNS (see FIGURE 47.11). In the mature CNS, glia called astrocytes provide structural and metabolic support for neurons. Astrocytes also induce the formation of tight junctions (see FIGURE 7.30) between cells lining the capillaries in the brain. The result is the blood-brain barrier, which restricts the passage of most substances into the brain, allowing the extracellular chemical environment of the CNS to be tightly controlled. Recent evidence also suggests that astrocytes communicate with one another and with neurons via chemical signals.

Oligodendrocytes (in the CNS) and Schwann cells (in the PNS) are glia that form insulating myelin sheaths around the axons of many neurons. The structure of a myelinated PNS axon is shown in FIGURE 48.5. Neurons become myelinated in a developing nervous system when Schwann cells or oligodendrocytes grow around axons such that their plasma membranes form concentric layers, somewhat like a jelly roll. The membranes are mostly lipid, which is a poor conductor of electrical currents. Thus, the myelin sheaths provide electrical insulation of the axon, analogous to the insulation that covers copper electrical wires. We will see later in this chapter that the myelin sheath also increases the speed of propagation of nerve impulses. In the degenerative disease known as multiple sclerosis, myelin sheaths gradually deteriorate, resulting in a progressive loss of coordination due to the disruption of nerve impulse transmission. Clearly, supporting cells are indispensable partners of neurons in a working nervous system.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-5. Schwann cells. In the peripheral nervous system, supporting cells called Schwann cells wrap many axons with an insulating myelin sheath. Gaps between successive Schwann cells are called nodes of Ranvier.




