
 Lamarck placed fossils in an evolutionary context

Toward the end of the 18th century, several naturalists, including Erasmus Darwin, Charles Darwin's grandfather, suggested that life had evolved as environments changed. But only one of Charles Darwin's predecessors developed a comprehensive model that attempted to explain how life evolves: Jean Baptiste Lamarck.

Lamarck published his theory of evolution in 1809, the year Darwin was born. Lamarck was in charge of the invertebrate collection at the Natural History Museum in Paris. By comparing current species with fossil forms, Lamarck could see what appeared to be several lines of descent, each a chronological series of older to younger fossils leading to a modern species.

Lamarck is remembered most for the mechanism he proposed to explain how specific adaptations evolve. It incorporates two ideas that were popular during Lamarck's era. The first was use and disuse, the idea that those parts of the body used extensively to cope with the environment become larger and stronger while those that are not used deteriorate. Among the examples Lamarck cited were a blacksmith developing a bigger bicep in the arm that wields the hammer and a giraffe stretching its neck to reach leaves on high branches. The second idea Lamarck adopted was called the inheritance of acquired characteristics. In this concept of heredity, the modifications an organism acquires during its lifetime can be passed along to its offspring. The long neck of the giraffe, Lamarck reasoned, evolved gradually as the cumulative product of a great many generations of ancestors stretching ever higher.

There is, however, no evidence that acquired characteristics can be inherited. Blacksmiths may increase strength and stamina by a lifetime of pounding with a heavy hammer, but these acquired traits do not change genes transmitted by gametes to offspring. Even though the Lamarckian theory of evolution is ridiculed often today because of its erroneous assumption that acquired characteristics are inherited, in Lamarck's time that concept of inheritance was generally accepted (and, indeed, Darwin could offer no acceptable alternative). To most of Lamarck's contemporaries, however, the mechanism of evolution was an irrelevant issue because they firmly believed that species were fixed and that no theory of evolution could be taken seriously. Lamarck was vilified, especially by Cuvier, who denied that species ever evolve. In retrospect, Lamarck deserves much credit for his theory, which was visionary in many respects: in its claim that evolution is the best explanation for both the fossil record and the current diversity of life; in its recognition of the great age of Earth; and especially in its emphasis on adaptation to the environment as a primary product of evolution.




