
 The stomach stores food and performs preliminary digestion

The stomach is located in the upper abdominal cavity, just below the diaphragm. With accordionlike folds and a very elastic wall, the stomach can stretch to accommodate about 2 L of food and fluid. Because this large organ can store an entire meal, we do not need to eat constantly. Besides storing food, the stomach performs important digestive functions: it secretes a digestive fluid called gastric juice and mixes this secretion with the food by the churning action of the smooth muscles in the stomach wall.

Gastric juice is secreted by the epithelium lining numerous deep pits in the stomach wall. With a high concentration of hydrochloric acid, gastric juice has a pH of about 2--acidic enough to dissolve iron nails. One function of the acid is to disrupt the extracellular matrix that binds cells together in meat and plant material. The acid also kills most bacteria that are swallowed with food. Also present in gastric juice is pepsin, an enzyme that begins the hydrolysis of proteins. Pepsin breaks peptide bonds adjacent to specific amino acids, cleaving proteins into smaller polypeptides. Pepsin is one of the few enzymes that works best in a strongly acidic environment. The low pH of gastric juice denatures (unfolds) the proteins in food, increasing exposure of their peptide bonds to pepsin.

What prevents pepsin from destroying the cells of the stomach wall? First, pepsin is secreted in an inactive form called pepsinogen by specialized cells called chief cells located in gastric pits (FIGURE 41.15). Other cells, called parietal cells, also in the pits, secrete hydrochloric acid. The acid converts pepsinogen to active pepsin by removing a small portion of the molecule and exposing its active site. Because different cells secrete the acid and pepsinogen, the two ingredients do not mix--and pepsinogen is not activated--until they enter the lumen of the stomach. Activation of pepsinogen is an example of positive feedback. Once some pepsinogen is activated by acid, activation occurs at an increasingly rapid rate because pepsin itself can activate additional molecules of pepsinogen. Many other digestive enzymes are also secreted in inactive forms that become active within the lumen of the digestive tract.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 41-15. Secretion of gastric juice.

The stomach's second defense against self-digestion is a coating of mucus, secreted by the epithelial cells, that helps protect the stomach lining. Still, the epithelium is constantly eroded, and mitosis generates enough cells to completely replace the stomach lining every three days. Gastric ulcers, lesions in the stomach lining, are caused mainly by the acid-tolerant bacterium Helicobacter pylori and are treated with antibiotics. However, gastric ulcers may worsen if pepsin and acid destroy the lining faster than it can regenerate.

About every 20 seconds, the stomach contents are mixed by the churning action of smooth muscles. You may feel hunger pangs when your empty stomach churns. (Sensations of hunger are also associated with brain centers that monitor the blood's nutritional status.) As a result of mixing and enzyme action, what begins in the stomach as a recently swallowed meal becomes a nutrient-rich broth known as acid chyme.

Most of the time, the stomach is closed off at either end (see FIGURE 41.13). The opening from the esophagus to the stomach, the cardiac orifice, normally dilates only when a bolus driven by peristalsis arrives. The occasional backflow of acid chyme from the stomach into the lower end of the esophagus causes heartburn. (If backflow is a persistent problem, an ulcer may develop in the esophagus.) At the opening from the stomach to the small intestine is the pyloric sphincter, which helps regulate the passage of chyme into the intestine. A squirt at a time, it takes about 2 to 6 hours after a meal for the stomach to empty.




