
 Glycolysis and the Krebs cycle connect to many other metabolic pathways

So far, we have treated the oxidative breakdown of glucose in isolation from the cell's overall metabolic economy. In this section, you will learn that glycolysis and the Krebs cycle are major intersections of various catabolic and anabolic (biosynthetic) pathways.

The Versatility of Catabolism

Throughout this chapter, we have used glucose as the fuel for cellular respiration. But free glucose molecules are not common in the diets of humans and other animals. We obtain most of our calories in the form of fats, proteins, sucrose and other disaccharides, and starch, a polysaccharide. All these food molecules can be used by cellular respiration to make ATP (FIGURE 9.19).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 9-19. The catabolism of various food molecules. Carbohydrates, fats, and proteins can all be used as fuel for cellular respiration. Monomers of these food molecules enter glycolysis or the Krebs cycle at various points. Glycolysis and the Krebs cycle are catabolic funnels through which electrons from all kinds of food molecules flow on their exergonic fall to oxygen.

Glycolysis can accept a wide range of carbohydrates for catabolism. In the digestive tract, starch is hydrolyzed to glucose, which can then be broken down in the cells by glycolysis and the Krebs cycle. Similarly, glycogen, the polysaccharide that humans and many other animals store in their liver and muscle cells, can be hydrolyzed to glucose between meals as fuel for respiration. The digestion of disaccharides, including sucrose, provides glucose and other monosaccharides as fuel for respiration.

Proteins can also be used for fuel, but first they must be digested to their constituent amino acids. Many of the amino acids, of course, are used by the organism to build new proteins. Amino acids present in excess are converted by enzymes to intermediates of glycolysis and the Krebs cycle. Before amino acids can feed into glycolysis or the Krebs cycle, their amino groups must be removed, a process called deamination. The nitrogenous refuse is excreted from the animal in the form of ammonia, urea, or other waste products.

Catabolism can also harvest energy stored in fats obtained either from food or from storage cells in the body. After fats are digested, the glycerol is converted to glyceraldehyde phosphate, an intermediate of glycolysis. Most of the energy of a fat is stored in the fatty acids. A metabolic sequence called beta oxidation breaks the fatty acids down to two-carbon fragments, which enter the Krebs cycle as acetyl CoA. Fats make excellent fuel. A gram of fat oxidized by respiration produces more than twice as much ATP as a gram of carbohydrate. Unfortunately, this also means that a dieter must be patient while using fat stored in the body, because so many calories are stockpiled in each gram of fat.

Biosynthesis (Anabolic Pathways)

Cells need substance as well as energy. Not all the organic molecules of food are destined to be oxidized as fuel to make ATP. In addition to calories, food must also provide the carbon skeletons that cells require to make their own molecules. Some organic monomers obtained from digestion can be used directly. For example, as previously mentioned, amino acids from the hydrolysis of proteins in food can be incorporated into the organism's own proteins. Often, however, the body needs specific molecules that are not present as such in food. Compounds formed as intermediates of glycolysis and the Krebs cycle can be diverted into anabolic pathways as precursors from which the cell can synthesize the molecules it requires. For example, humans can make about half of the 20 amino acids in proteins by modifying compounds siphoned away from the Krebs cycle. Also, glucose can be made from pyruvate, and fatty acids can be synthesized from acetyl CoA. Of course, these anabolic, or biosynthetic, pathways do not generate ATP, but instead consume it.

In addition, glycolysis and the Krebs cycle function as metabolic interchanges that enable our cells to convert some kinds of molecules to others as we need them. For instance, carbohydrates and proteins can be converted to fats through intermediates of glycolysis and the Krebs cycle. If we eat more food than we need, we store fat even if our diet is fat-free. Metabolism is remarkably versatile and adaptable.




