
 Osteichthyes: The extant classes of bony fishes are the ray-finned fishes, the lobe-finned fishes, and the lungfishes

Of all vertebrate groups, bony fishes are the most numerous, both in individuals and in species (about 30,000). Ranging in size from about 1 cm to more than 6 m long, bony fishes are abundant in the seas and in nearly every freshwater habitat (FIGURE 34.12).

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-12. Ray-finned fishes (class Actinopterygii). (a) Yellow perch (b) Long-snouted sea horse

Until recently, zoologists combined all bony fishes into a single vertebrate class (Osteichthyes), and we'll continue to use that name as a general, informal one for the great diversity of bony fishes. However, based on cladistic analysis, most vertebrate systematists now recognize three extant classes of bony fishes: the ray-finned fishes, the lobe-finned fishes, and the lungfishes (see FIGURE 34.7).

Nearly all bony fishes have an ossified endoskeleton with a hard matrix of calcium phosphate. The skin is often covered by flattened, bony scales that differ in structure from the toothlike scales of sharks. Glands in the skin of a bony fish secrete a mucus that gives the animal its characteristic sliminess, an adaptation that reduces drag during swimming. In common with sharks, bony fishes have a lateral line system clearly evident as a row of tiny pits in the skin on either side of the body (FIGURE 34.13).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-13. Anatomy of a trout, a representive ray-finned fish.

Bony fishes breathe by drawing water over four or five pairs of gills located in chambers covered by a protective flap called the operculum. Water is drawn into the mouth, through the pharynx, and out between the gills by movement of the operculum and contraction of muscles surrounding the gill chambers. This process enables a bony fish to breathe while stationary.

Another adaptation of most bony fishes not found in sharks is the swim bladder, an air sac that helps control the buoyancy of the fish. The transfer of gases between the swim bladder and the blood varies the inflation of the bladder and adjusts the density of the fish. Thus, many bony fishes, in contrast to most sharks, can conserve energy by remaining almost motionless. Swim bladders evolved from balloonlike lungs, which the ancestral bony fishes may have used to supplement gas exchange by gills in shallow water.

Bony fishes are generally maneuverable swimmers, their flexible fins better for steering and propulsion than the stiffer fins of sharks. The fastest bony fishes can swim in short bursts of up to 80 km/hr.

Details about the reproduction of bony fishes vary extensively. Most species are oviparous, reproducing by external fertilization after the female sheds large numbers of small eggs. However, internal fertilization and birthing characterize other species.

Both cartilaginous and bony fishes diversified extensively during the Devonian and Carboniferous periods, but whereas sharks arose in the sea, bony fishes probably originated in fresh water. Swim bladders were modified from simple lungs that had augmented the gills in gas exchange, perhaps in stagnant swamps with low oxygen content. The three classes of bony fishes that exist today had diverged by the end of the Devonian.

Nearly all the families of fishes familiar to us are ray-finned fishes (class Actinopterygii; Gr. aktin, "ray," and pteryg, "wing" or "fin"). The various species of bass, trout, perch, tuna, and herring are examples. The fins, supported mainly by long flexible rays, are modified for maneuvering, defense, and other functions (see FIGURE 34.12a). Ray-finned fishes spread from fresh water to the seas during their long history. (Adaptations that solve the osmotic problems of this move to salt water are discussed in Chapter 44.) Numerous species of ray-finned fishes returned to fresh water at some point in their evolution. Some of these, including salmon and sea-run trout, replay their evolutionary round-trip from fresh water to seawater back to fresh water during their life cycle.

In contrast to the ray-fins, lobe-finned fishes (class Actinistia) have muscular pectoral and pelvic fins supported by extensions of the bony skeleton. Known mainly from the fossil record, many lobe-fins were large, apparently bottom dwellers that may have used their paired, muscular fins as aids to "walking" on the substrate under water. Lobe-finned fishes are represented today by only one known genus, the coelacanth (Latimeria) (FIGURE 34.14). A population of coelacanths inhabiting waters near Indonesia may represent a different species than the only other known populations, which live in deep waters off the coasts of Madagascar and South Africa. Although most Devonian lobe-fins were probably freshwater animals with lungs, Latimeria belongs to a lineage that entered the seas at some point in its evolution.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-14. A coelocanth (Latimeria), the only extant lobe-finned genus.

Three genera of lungfishes (class Dipnoi) live today in the Southern Hemisphere. They generally inhabit stagnant ponds and swamps, surfacing to gulp air into lungs connected to the pharynx of the digestive tract. Lungfishes also have gills, which are the main organs for gas exchange in Australian lungfishes. When ponds shrink during the dry season, some lungfishes can burrow in the mud and aestivate (wait in a state of torpor).

Although most lineages of lungfishes died out, these groups were dominant predators in shallow freshwater habitats during the Devonian. They were also of great importance in vertebrate evolution; the ancestor of amphibians and all other tetrapods was probably one of these Devonian bony fishes.




