
 Phase changes mark major shifts in development

From what you have learned so far about the shoot apex and primary growth, it would seem as if the meristem lays down an identical repeating pattern of stems and leaves. In fact, the apical meristem can change from one developmental phase to another during its history--a process called a phase change. One of these phase changes is a gradual transition in vegetative (leaf-producing) growth from a juvenile state to a mature state in some species. Usually, the most obvious sign of this phase change is a change in the morphology of the leaves produced. The leaves of juvenile versus mature shoot regions differ in shape and other features (FIGURE 35.34). Once the meristem has laid down juvenile nodes and internodes, they retain that status even as the shoot continues to elongate and the meristem eventually changes to the mature phase. If axillary buds give rise to branches, those shoots reflect the developmental phase of the main shoot region from which they arise. Though the main shoot apex may have made the transition from the juvenile to the mature phase, an older region of the shoot below the apex will continue to give rise to branches bearing juvenile leaves if that shoot region was laid down when the main apex was still in the juvenile phase. Ironically, this means that a branch with juvenile leaves may actually be older than a branch with mature leaves. This is analogous to repairing a vintage automobile with newly manufactured body parts; the parts are new, but they must be of the old style to go with the rest of the car.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-34. Phase change in the shoot system of Eucalyptus. A silver-dollar eucalyptus (Eucalyptus polyanthemos) has both (a) juvenile leaves (the round "silver dollars") and (b) mature leaves (the lance-shaped leaves). This dual foliage reflects a phase change in the development of the apical meristem of each shoot. In its juvenile vegetative phase, a meristem lays down modules on which round leaves develop. As the meristem changes gradually to the mature vegetative phase, the leaves become more and more lance-shaped. Once a module forms, its developmental phase--juvenile or mature--is fixed; that is, round leaves do not mature into lanceolate leaves.

The juvenile-to-mature phase transition is another case where it is misleading to compare plant and animal development. In an animal, this transition occurs at the level of the entire organism--as when a larva develops into an adult animal, for example. In plants, phase changes during the history of apical meristems can result in juvenile and mature regions coexisting along the axis of each shoot.




