
 Gas exchange supplies oxygen for cellular respiration and disposes of carbon dioxide: an overview

For the rest of this chapter we focus on gas exchange. This process is often called respiration, but it should not be confused with the energy transformations of cellular respiration. Gas exchange is the uptake of molecular oxygen (O2) from the environment and the discharge of carbon dioxide (CO2) to the environment (FIGURE 42.18). These exchanges are necessary to support the production of ATP in cellular respiration, and usually involve both the respiratory system and the circulatory system.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-18. The role of gas exchange in bioenergetics.

The source of oxygen, called the respiratory medium, is air for terrestrial animals and water for aquatic animals. The atmosphere is Earth's main reservoir of molecular oxygen and is about 21%  O2 (by volume). Oceans, lakes, and other bodies of water contain oxygen in dissolved form. The amount of O2 dissolved in a given volume of water varies considerably, but is always much less than is present in an equivalent volume of air.

The part of an animal where gases are exchanged with the environment is called the respiratory surface. Animals do not actively transport O2 and CO2 across membranes, so movement of these gases between the respiratory surface and the environment is entirely by diffusion. The rate of diffusion is proportional to the surface area across which diffusion occurs, and inversely proportional to the square of the distance through which molecules must move. Therefore, respiratory surfaces tend to be thin and have large areas, structural adaptations that maximize the rate of gas exchange. Moreover, all living cells must be bathed in water to maintain their plasma membranes. Thus, the respiratory surfaces of terrestrial as well as aquatic animals are moist, and O2 and CO2 diffuse across them after first dissolving in water.

The respiratory surface must supply O2 and expel CO2 for the entire body, and a variety of solutions to the problem of providing a large enough surface have evolved. The structure of a respiratory surface depends mainly on the size of the organism and whether it lives in water or on land, but is also influenced by metabolic demands for gas exchange. Thus, an endotherm has a larger area of respiratory surface than a similar-sized ectotherm.

Gas exchange occurs over the entire surface area of protists and other unicellular organisms. Similarly, for some relatively simple animals, such as sponges, cnidarians, and flatworms, the plasma membrane of every cell in the body is close enough to the outside environment for gases to diffuse in and out. In many animals, however, the bulk of the body does not have direct access to the respiratory medium, and the respiratory surface is a thin, moist epithelium separating the respiratory medium from the blood or capillaries, which transport gases to and from the rest of the body (see FIGURE 42.18).

Some animals use their entire outer skin as a respiratory organ. An earthworm, for example, has moist skin and exchanges gases by diffusion across its general body surface. Just below the skin is a dense net of capillaries. Because the respiratory surface must be moist, earthworms and many other skin-breathers, including some amphibians, must live in water or damp places.

Animals that use their moist skin as their only respiratory organ are usually small and are either long and thin or flat in shape, with a high ratio of surface area to volume. For most other animals, the general body surface lacks sufficient area to exchange gases for the whole body. The solution is a respiratory organ that is extensively folded or branched, thereby enlarging the available surface area for gas exchange. Gills, tracheae, and lungs are the three most common respiratory organs.




