
 Evolution is the core theme of biology

The history of life, as documented by fossils and other evidence, is a saga of a restless Earth billions of years old, inhabited by a changing cast of living forms (FIGURE 1.13). Life evolves. Just as an individual has a family history, each species is one twig of a branching tree of life extending back in time through ancestral species more and more remote. Species that are very similar, such as the brown bear and the polar bear, share a common ancestor that represents a relatively recent branch point on the tree of life. But through an ancestor that lived much farther back in time, all bears are also related to squirrels, humans, and all other mammals. Hair and milk-producing mammary glands are just two of a long list of uniquely mammalian traits. It is what we would expect if all mammals descended from a common ancestor, a prototypical mammal. And mammals, birds, reptiles, and all other vertebrates share a common ancestor even more ancient. Evidence of a still broader relationship can be found in such similarities as the matching machinery of all eukaryotic cilia (see FIGURE 1.12). Trace life back far enough, and there are only fossils of the primeval prokaryotes that inhabited Earth over 3.5 billion years ago. We can recognize some of their vestiges in our own cells--in the universal genetic code, for example. All of life is connected. And the basis for this kinship is evolution, the process that has transformed life on Earth from its earliest beginnings to the extensive diversity we see today. Evolution is the one theme that ties together all others and unifies biology.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 1-13. Digging into the past. Paleontologist Paul Sereno excavates the leg bones of a dinosaur named Jobaria. See the interview on pages 508-509 for the story of Paul Sereno's expedition to Niger in Africa, where this giant plant-eating dinosaur was unearthed. The fossil record supports other evidence that life has changed dramatically over Earth's long history.

Darwin and Natural Selection

Charles Darwin (FIGURE 1.14) brought biology into focus in 1859 when he published The Origin of Species. Darwin's book presented two main concepts. First, Darwin argued convincingly from several lines of evidence that contemporary species arose from a succession of ancestors through a process of "descent with modification," his phrase for evolution. (The evidence for evolution is discussed in detail in Chapter 22.) Darwin's second concept in The Origin of Species was his theory for how life evolves. This proposed mechanism of evolution is called natural selection.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 1-14. Charles Darwin (1809-1882). Darwin and his son William posed for this photograph in 1842. The author of numerous books and monographs on topics as diverse as barnacles, plant movements, and island geology, Darwin would be remembered as one of the greatest naturalists of the 19th century even if he had never published on the topic of evolution. But it was The Origin of Species that established Darwin's place as the most influential scientist in the development of modern biology. He is buried next to Isaac Newton in London's Westminster Abbey.

Darwin synthesized the concept of natural selection from observations that by themselves were neither new nor profound. Others had the pieces of the puzzle, but Darwin saw how they fit together. He inferred natural selection by connecting two observations:

OBSERVATION #1: Individual variation. Individuals in a population of any species vary in many heritable traits.

OBSERVATION #2: Struggle for existence. Any population of a species has the potential to produce far more offspring than the environment can possibly support with food, space, and other resources. This overproduction makes a struggle for existence among the variant members of a population inevitable.

INFERENCE: Differential reproductive success. Those individuals with traits best suited to the local environment generally leave a disproportionately large number of surviving, fertile offspring. This differential reproductive success of some individuals over others means that certain heritable traits (those carried by the best-suited individuals) are more likely to appear in each new generation. Darwin called differential reproductive success natural selection, and he envisioned it as the cause of evolution (FIGURE 1.15, p. 14).

We see the products of natural selection in the exquisite adaptations of organisms to the special problems posed by their environments (FIGURE 1.16, p. 14). Notice, however, that natural selection does not create adaptations; rather, it screens the heritable variations in each generation, increasing the frequencies of some variations and decreasing the frequencies of others over the generations. Natural selection is an editing process, with heritable variations exposed to environmental factors that favor the reproductive success of some individuals over others. The camouflage of the sea horse in FIGURE 1.16 did not result from individuals changing during their lifetimes to look more like their backgrounds and then passing that improvement on to offspring. The adaptation evolved over many generations by the greater reproductive success in each generation of individuals that were innately better camouflaged than the average member of the sea horse population.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 1-16. Evolutionary adaptation is a product of natural selection. This sea horse lives among kelp (seaweed). The fish looks so much like a seaweed that it lures prey into the seeming safety of the kelp forest and then eats them. The camouflage also helps prevent the sea horse itself from becoming prey.

Natural Selection and the Diversity of Life

Darwin proposed that natural selection, by its cumulative effects over vast spans of time, could produce new species from ancestral species. This would occur, for example, if a population fragmented into several populations isolated in different environments. In these various arenas of natural selection, what began as one species could gradually diversify into many species as the geographically isolated populations adapted over many generations to different sets of environmental problems (FIGURE 1.17).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 1-17. Diversification of finches on the Gal&aacute;pagos Islands.(a) The Gal&aacute;pagos, which Darwin visited in 1835, are a relatively young cluster of volcanic islands about 900 kilometers (540 miles) off the Pacific coast of South America. The islands are home to many species of plants and animals found nowhere else in the world, though Gal&aacute;pagos life-forms are clearly related to species inhabiting the South American mainland. (b) Fourteen species of finches classified in three different genera diversified on the various islands of the Gal&aacute;pagos. These birds probably descended from a common ancestor that managed to reach the Gal&aacute;pagos from the South American mainland several million years ago after volcanism built the islands. Note the specialization of beaks, which are adapted to various food sources on the different islands.

Descent with modification accounts for both the unity and the diversity we observe in life. In many cases, features shared by two species are due to their descent from common ancestors, and differences between the species are due to natural selection modifying the ancestral equipment in different environmental contexts. Evolution is the core theme of biology--a unifying thread that ties every chapter of this text together.




