
 Vertebrates have single-lens eyes

Similar to the single-lens eyes of many invertebrates, the eyes of vertebrates are also cameralike, but they evolved independently in the vertebrate lineage and differ from the single-lens eyes of invertebrates in several details. The human eye, shown in FIGURE 49.9, is capable of detecting an almost countless variety of colors, forming images of objects miles away, and responding to as little as one photon of light. Remember, however, that it is actually the brain that "sees." Thus, to understand vision we must begin by learning how the vertebrate eye generates sensations (action potentials), and then follow these signals to the visual centers of the brain, where images are perceived.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 49-9. Structure of the vertebrate eye. In this longitudinal section of the eye, the jellylike vitreous humor is illustrated only in the lower half of the eyeball. The mucous membrane, or conjunctiva, surrounding the sclera (the white of the eye) is not shown.

The globe of the vertebrate eye, or eyeball, consists of a tough, white outer layer of connective tissue called the sclera and a thin, pigmented inner layer called the choroid. A delicate layer of epithelial cells forms a mucous membrane, the conjunctiva, that covers the outer surface of the sclera and helps keep the eye moist. At the front of the eye the sclera becomes the transparent cornea, which lets light into the eye and acts as a fixed lens. The conjunctiva does not cover the cornea. The anterior choroid forms the donut-shaped iris, which gives the eye its color. By changing size, the iris regulates the amount of light entering the pupil, the hole in the center of the iris. Just inside the choroid, the retina forms the innermost layer of the eyeball and contains the photoreceptor cells. Information from the photoreceptors leaves the eye at the optic disc, where the optic nerve attaches to the eye. Because there are no photoreceptors in the optic disc, this spot on the lower outside of the retina is a blind spot: Light focused onto that part of the retina is not detected.

The lens and ciliary body divide the eye into two cavities, one between the lens and the cornea, and a much larger cavity behind the lens within the eyeball itself. The ciliary body constantly produces the clear, watery aqueous humor that fills the anterior cavity of the eye. Blockage of the ducts that drain the aqueous humor can produce glaucoma, increased pressure that leads to blindness by compressing the retina. The posterior cavity, filled with the jellylike vitreous humor, constitutes most of the volume of the eye. The aqueous and vitreous humors function as liquid lenses that help focus light onto the retina. The lens itself is a transparent protein disc that focuses an image onto the retina. Like squid and octopuses, many fishes focus by moving the lens forward or backward, as in a camera. Humans and other mammals, however, focus by changing the shape of the lens. When viewing a distant object, the lens is flat. When focusing on a close object, the lens becomes almost spherical, a change called accommodation (FIGURE 49.10).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 49-10. Focusing in the mammalian eye. The lens bends light and focuses it onto the retina. The thicker the lens, the more sharply the light is bent. The lens is nearly spherical when focusing on near objects and much flatter when focusing on distant objects. Ciliary muscles control the shape of the lens. (a) In near vision, the ciliary muscles contract, pulling the border of the choroid layer of the eye toward the lens and causing the suspensory ligaments to relax. With this reduced tension, the elastic lens becomes thicker and rounder. This adjustment of the lens for close vision is known as accommodation. (b) In distance vision, the ciliary muscles relax, allowing the choroid to expand and put tension on the suspensory ligaments. The lens is pulled into a flatter shape.

The human retina contains about 125 million rod cells and 6 million cone cells, two types of photoreceptors named for their shapes. They account for 70%  of all sensory receptors in the body, a fact that underscores the importance of the eyes and visual information in how humans perceive their environment.

Rods and cones have different functions in vision, and the relative numbers of these two photoreceptors in the retina are partly correlated with whether an animal is most active during the day or at night. Rods are more sensitive to light but do not distinguish colors; they enable us to see at night, but only in black and white. Because it takes more light to stimulate cones, these receptors contribute very little to night vision. Cones can distinguish colors in daylight. Color vision is found in all vertebrate classes, though not in all species. Most fishes, amphibians, reptiles, and birds have strong color vision, but humans and other primates are among the minority of mammals with this ability. Most mammals are nocturnal, and a maximum number of rods in the retina is an adaptation that gives these animals keen night vision. Cats, usually most active at night, have limited color vision and probably see a pastel world during the day. In the human eye, rods are found in greatest density at the peripheral regions of the retina and are completely absent from the fovea, the center of the visual field (see FIGURE 49.9). You cannot see a dim star at night by looking at it directly; if you view it at an angle, however, focusing the starlight onto the regions of the retinas most populated by rods, you will be able to see the star. You achieve your sharpest daylight vision by looking straight at the object of interest because cones are most dense at the fovea, where there are about 150,000 color receptors per mm2. Some birds have more than a million cones per mm2, which enables such species as hawks to spot mice and other small prey from high in the sky. In the retina of the eye, as in all biological structures, variations represent evolutionary adaptations.




