
 Nutrient cycling is strongly regulated by vegetation

Many research groups are conducting long-term ecological research (LTER) to monitor the dynamics of natural ecosystems over long periods of time. Let's examine one example of LTER that has helped ecologists understand the key role plants play in regulating nutrient cycles.

Since 1963, a team of scientists has been conducting a long-term study of nutrient cycling in a forest ecosystem. The study site is the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest, in the White Mountains of New Hampshire. It is a deciduous forest with several valleys, each drained by a small creek that is a tributary of Hubbard Brook. Bedrock impenetrable to water is close to the surface of the soil, and each valley constitutes a watershed that can drain only through its creek.

The research team first determined the mineral budget for each of six valleys by measuring the inflow and outflow of several key nutrients. They collected rainfall at several sites to measure the amount of water and dissolved minerals added to the ecosystem. To monitor the loss of water and minerals, they constructed a small concrete dam with a V-shaped spillway across the creek at the bottom of each valley (FIGURE 54.21a, p. 1214). About 60%  of the water added to the ecosystem as rainfall and snow exits through the stream, and the remaining 40%  is lost by transpiration from plants, evaporation from other organisms, and evaporation from the soil.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 54-21. Nutrient cycling in the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest: an example of long-term ecological research. (a) Concrete dams built across streams at the bottom of watersheds enabled researchers to monitor the outflow of water and nutrients from the ecosystem. (b) Some watersheds were completely logged to study the effects of the loss of vegetation on drainage and nutrient cycling. (c) The concentration of nitrate in runoff from the deforested watershed was 60 times greater than in a control (unloged) watershed.

Preliminary studies confirmed that internal cycling within a terrestrial ecosystem conserves most of the mineral nutrients. Mineral inflow and outflow balanced and were relatively small compared with the quantity of minerals being recycled within the forest ecosystem. For example, only about 0.3%  more Ca2+ left a valley via its creek than was added by rainwater, and this small net loss was probably replaced by chemical decomposition of the bedrock. During most years, the forest actually registered small net gains of a few mineral nutrients, including nitrogenous ones.

In 1966, one of the valleys, with an area of 15.6 hectares, was completely logged and then sprayed with herbicides for three years to prevent regrowth of plants (FIGURE 54.21b). All the original plant material was left in place to decompose. The inflow and outflow of water and minerals in the experimentally altered watershed were compared with the inflow and outflow in a control watershed for three years. Water runoff from the altered watershed increased by 30-40% , apparently because there were no plants to absorb and transpire water from the soil. Net losses of minerals from the altered watershed were huge. The concentration of Ca2+ in the creek increased fourfold, for example, and the concentration of K+ increased by a factor of 15. Most remarkable was the loss of nitrate, which increased in concentration in the creek 60-fold (FIGURE 54.21c). Not only was this vital mineral nutrient drained from the ecosystem, but nitrate in the creek reached a level considered unsafe for drinking water.

This study demonstrated that the amount of nutrients leaving an intact forest ecosystem is controlled by the plants themselves; when plants are not present to retain them, nutrients are lost from the system. These effects are almost immediate, occurring within a few months of logging, and continue as long as plants are absent.

After 35 years, data from Hubbard Brook point to some other long-term trends. It now appears that none of the watersheds was undisturbed by human activity even when the study began. For instance, before and during the study, acid precipitation seems to have caused an increase in the levels of Ca2+ in stream water. Apparently, since the 1950s, acid rain and snow have dissolved most of the Ca2+ from the forest soil, and the streams have carried it away. By the 1990s, forest plants at Hubbard Brook had virtually stopped adding new growth, apparently because of a lack of Ca2+.

Although the Hubbard Brook study and several other LTER projects were designed to assess natural ecosystem dynamics, the results continue to provide important insight into the mechanisms by which human activities affect these processes. In this chapter's last section, we will examine how human intrusions in ecosystem dynamics are altering the biosphere.




