
 Molds, yeasts, lichens, and mycorrhizae are specialized lifestyles that evolved independently in diverse fungal phyla

Certain ways of living that require both morphological and ecological adaptations have evolved independently among the zygote fungi, sac fungi, and club fungi. This section explores four fungal forms with highly specialized ways of life: molds, yeasts, lichens, and mycorrhizae.

Molds

Mention of fungi may bring the ubiquitous molds to mind. A mold is a rapidly growing, asexually reproducing fungus. The mycelia of these fungi grow as saprobes or parasites on a great variety of substrates. You are already familiar with one example, bread mold (Rhizopus; see FIGURE 31.6). Molds may go through a series of different reproductive stages. Early in life, a mold produces asexual spores. The term mold applies only to these asexual stages (FIGURE 31.14). Later, the same fungus may reproduce sexually, producing zygosporangia, ascocarps, or basidiocarps.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 31-14. A moldy orange."Blue mold" is usually caused by a species of Penicillium, an ascomycete. This mold reproduces asexually by producing chains of conidia on hyphae called conidiophores (right, SEM).

There are also molds that cannot be classified as zygomycetes, ascomycetes, or basidiomycetes because they have no known sexual stages. Those molds are collectively called deuteromycetes, or imperfect fungi (from the botanical use of the term perfect to refer to the sexual stages of life cycles). Imperfect fungi reproduce asexually by producing spores. Note that this is an informal grouping without phylogenetic basis. Whenever a mycologist discovers a sexual stage in one of these fungi, the species is moved from the imperfect category to a particular phylum, depending on the type of sexual structures.

Yeasts

Yeasts are unicellular fungi that inhabit liquid or moist habitats, including plant sap and animal tissues. Yeasts reproduce asexually, by simple cell division or by the pinching of small "bud cells" off a parent cell (FIGURE 31.15). Some yeasts reproduce sexually, by forming asci or basidia, and are classified as Ascomycota or Basidiomycota. Others are placed in the imperfect fungi because no sexual stages are known. Some fungi can grow as either single cells (yeasts) or as a filamentous mycelium, depending on the availability of nutrients.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 31-15. Budding yeast. This micrograph shows Saccharomyces cerevisiae in various stages of budding (SEM).

Humans have used yeasts to raise bread and ferment alcoholic beverages for thousands of years. Only relatively recently have the yeasts involved been separated into pure culture for more controlled human use. The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, an ascomycete, is the most important of all domesticated fungi (see FIGURE 31.15). The tiny yeast cells, available as many strains of baker's yeast and brewer's yeast, are very active metabolically. The cells release small bubbles of CO2 that leaven dough. Cultured anaerobically in breweries and wineries, Saccharomyces ferments sugars to alcohol. Researchers use Saccharomyces to study the molecular genetics of eukaryotes because these microbes are easy to culture and manipulate (see Chapter 19).

Some yeasts cause problems for humans. A pink yeast, Rhodotorula, grows on shower curtains and other moist surfaces in our homes. Another yeast is Candida, one of the normal inhabitants of moist human epithelial tissue, such as the vaginal lining. Certain circumstances can cause Candida to become pathogenic by growing too rapidly and releasing harmful substances ("yeast infections"). This can occur, for example, with an environmental change such as a pH shift, or when the immune system of the human host is compromised--by AIDS, for instance.

Lichens

At a distance, lichens are often mistaken for mosses or other simple plants growing on rocks, rotting logs, trees, and roofs (FIGURE 31.16). In fact, lichens are not mosses or any other kind of plant, nor are they even individual organisms. A lichen is a symbiotic association of millions of photosynthetic microorganisms held in a mesh of fungal hyphae. The fungal component is most commonly an ascomycete, but several basidiomycete lichens are known. The photosynthetic partners are usually unicellular or filamentous green algae or cyanobacteria. The merger of fungus and alga is so complete that lichens are actually given genus and species names, as though they were single organisms. Over 25,000 species have been described.

The fungus usually gives the lichen its overall shape and structure, and tissues formed by hyphae account for most of the lichen's mass. The algal component usually occupies an inner layer below the lichen surface (FIGURE 31.17). In most cases that have been examined, each partner provides things the other could not obtain on its own. The alga provides the fungus with food. Cyanobacteria in lichens fix nitrogen (see Chapter 27) and provide organic nitrogen. The fungus provides the alga with a suitable physical environment for growth. Lichens absorb most of the minerals they need either from dust in the air or from rain. The physical arrangement of hyphae retains water and minerals, allows for gas exchange, and protects the algae. Fungal pigments help shade the algae from intense sunlight. Some fungal compounds are toxic and prevent lichens from being eaten by consumers. The fungi also secrete acids, which aid in the uptake of minerals.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 31-17. Anatomy of a lichen.

The fungi of many lichens reproduce sexually by forming ascocarps or basidiocarps. Lichen algae reproduce independently of the fungus by asexual cell division. As might be expected of "dual organisms," asexual reproduction as symbiotic units also occurs commonly, either by fragmentation of the parental lichen or by the formation of specialized structures called soredia (see FIGURE 31.17). Soredia are small clusters of hyphae with embedded algae.

The nature of the lichen symbiosis is complex and is probably best described as mutual exploitation instead of mutual benefit. Lichens are able to live in environments where neither fungi nor algae could live alone. While the fungal components do not grow alone in the wild, some lichen algae also occur as free-living organisms. The fungi and algae of some lichens have been experimentally separated and cultured. Such cultures look like free-living molds and algae; the cultured fungi do not produce lichen compounds, and the cultured lichen algae do not "leak" carbohydrates from their cells as they do in lichens. In some lichens, the fungus invades the algal cells with haustoria and may kill some of them, though not as fast as the alga replenishes its numbers by reproduction.

Lichens are important pioneers on newly cleared rock and soil surfaces, such as burned forests and volcanic flows. Physical penetration of the outer crystals of rocks and chemical attack of rock by lichen acids help break down the rock and establish soil-trapping lichens. This process makes it possible for a succession of plants to grow. Nitrogen-fixing lichens also add organic nitrogen to some ecosystems.

Some lichens tolerate severe cold. In the arctic tundra, herds of caribou and reindeer graze on carpets of reindeer lichen (reindeer "moss") at times of the year when other foods are unavailable. Lichens can also survive desiccation. When it is foggy or rainy, lichens may absorb more than ten times their weight in water. Photosynthesis begins almost immediately when the water content reaches 65%  to 75% . In dry air, lichens rapidly dehydrate, and photosynthesis stops. Thus, in arid climates lichens grow very slowly, often less than a millimeter per year. Some lichens are thousands of years old, rivaling the oldest plants as the elder organisms on Earth.

As tough as lichens are, many do not stand up very well to air pollution. Their passive mode of mineral uptake from rain and moist air makes them particularly sensitive to sulfur dioxide and other aerial poisons. The death of sensitive lichens and an increase in hardier species in an area can be an early warning that air quality is deteriorating.

Mycorrhizae

Mycorrhizae are mutualistic associations of plant roots and fungi. The word mycorrhizae means "fungus roots," referring to the structures formed by both root cells and hyphae from the associated fungus (FIGURE 31.18). The anatomy of this symbiosis varies, depending on the type of fungus. The extensions of the fungal mycelium from the hyphae forming the mycorrhizae greatly increase the absorptive surface of the plant roots. The partners exchange minerals accumulated from the soil by the fungus for organic nutrients synthesized by the plant.

Mycorrhizae are enormously important in natural ecosystems and agriculture (FIGURE 31.19). Almost all vascular plants have mycorrhizae. The fungi involved are permanent associates with their hosts and periodically form fruiting bodies (structures for sexual reproduction). Basidiomycota, Ascomycota, and Zygomycota all have members that form mycorrhizae. In fact, almost half of all species of mushroom-forming basidiomycetes live as mycorrhizae with oak, birch, and pine trees. The mushrooms that sprout around the bases of these trees are the surface evidence of the underground symbiotic relationship between plants and fungi. (The structure and physiology of mycorrhizae are described in more detail in Chapter 36.)



Click image to enlarge



Fig 31-19. An experimental test of the benefits of mycorrhizae. The soybean plant on the left lacks mycorrhizae. It represents an experimental group of plants that researchers grew in soil treated with fungicide (poison that kills fungi). The plant's growth is stunted, probably due to a phosphorus deficiency. The plant on the right is from a control group with mycorrhizae, which enhance the uptake of phosphate and other minerals.




