
 Viroids and prions are infectious agents even simpler than viruses

As small and simple as viruses are, they dwarf another class of pathogens, viroids. These are tiny molecules of naked circular RNA that infect plants. Only several hundred nucleotides long, viroids do not encode proteins but can replicate in host plant cells, apparently using cellular enzymes. Somehow, these RNA molecules can disrupt the metabolism of a plant cell and stunt the growth of the whole plant. One viroid disease has killed over 10 million coconut palms in the Philippines. Viroids seem to cause errors in the regulatory systems that control plant growth, and the symptoms that are typically associated with viroid diseases are abnormal development and stunted growth.

An important lesson from viroids is that a molecule can be an infectious agent that spreads a disease. But viroids are nucleic acid, whose ability to replicate is well known. More difficult to explain is the evidence for infectious proteins, called prions. Prions appear to cause a number of degenerative brain diseases, including scrapie in sheep, the "mad cow disease" that has plagued the European beef industry in recent years, and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in humans. How can a protein, which cannot replicate itself, be a transmissible pathogen? According to the leading hypothesis, a prion is a misfolded form of a protein normally present in brain cells. When the prion gets into a cell containing the normal form of the protein, the prion converts the normal protein to the prion version (FIGURE 18.10). In this way, prions may repeatedly trigger chain reactions that increase their numbers. American scientist Stanley Prusiner has long championed the prion hypothesis and in 1997 was awarded a Nobel Prize for his research in this area. Today, mounting evidence supports the pathogenic role of prions in animal diseases and the hypothesis depicted in FIGURE 18.10.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 18-10. A hypothesis to explain how prions propagate. Prions are misfolded versions of normal brain proteins. When a prion contacts a normal "twin," it may induce the normal protein to assume the abnormal shape. The resulting chain reaction may continue until prions accumulate to dangerous levels, causing cellular malfunction and eventual degeneration of the brain.




