
 Metabolic rate provides clues to an animal's bioenergetic "strategy"

The flow of energy through an animal--the animal's bioenergetics--ultimately sets the limits to the animal's behavior, growth, and reproduction and determines how much food it needs. An understanding of bioenergetics tells us a great deal about an animal's adaptations and how it fits into its environment as an energy consumer. How much of the total energy an animal obtains from food does it need just to stay alive? How much energy must be expended to walk, run, swim, or fly from one place to another? What fraction of energy intake can be used for reproduction? Physiologists obtain answers to such questions by measuring the rates at which animals use chemical energy and how these rates change in different circumstances.

The amount of energy an animal uses in a unit of time is called its metabolic rate--the sum of all the energy-requiring biochemical reactions occurring over a given time interval. Energy is measured in calories (cal) or kilocalories (kcal). (A kilocalorie is 1,000 calories. The term Calorie, with a capital C, as used by many nutritionists, is actually a kilocalorie.)

Metabolic rate can be determined in several ways. Because nearly all of the chemical energy used in cellular respiration eventually appears as heat, metabolic rate can be measured by monitoring an animal's rate of heat loss. An animal is placed in a calorimeter, which is a closed, insulated chamber equipped with a device that records the animal's heat loss. Calorimeters are used most often with small animals, since they are cumbersome with large animals. A more indirect way to measure metabolic rate is to determine the amount of oxygen consumed or carbon dioxide produced by an animal's cellular respiration (FIGURE 40.11). Over long periods, the rate of food consumption and the energy content of the food (about 4.5-5 kcal per gram of protein or carbohydrate and about 9 kcal per gram of fat) can be used to estimate metabolic rate, but this method must account for the energy in food that cannot be used by the animal (the energy lost in feces and urine).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 40-11. Measuring metabolic rate.

There are two basic bioenergetic "strategies" used by animals. Birds and mammals are mainly endothermic, meaning their bodies are warmed by heat generated by metabolism, and their body temperature must be maintained at a certain level to sustain life (see Chapter 34). Endothermy is a high-energy strategy that permits intense, long-duration activity over a wide range of environmental temperatures. In contrast, most fishes, amphibians, reptiles, and invertebrates are ectothermic, meaning they do not produce enough metabolic heat to have much effect on body temperature. The ectothermic strategy requires much less energy than is needed by endotherms, because of the energy cost of heating (or cooling) an endothermic body. However, ectotherms are generally incapable of intense activity over long periods.




