
 Humanity is one very young twig on the vertebrate tree

In the continuum of life spanning over 3.5 billion years, humans and apes have shared ancestry for all but the last few million years. Paleoanthropology, the study of human origins and evolution, focuses on this tiny fraction of geologic time during which humans and chimpanzees diverged from a common ancestor.

Paleoanthropologists use two words that are easy to confuse. Hominoid is a broader term, referring to great apes and humans. (Note that "anthropoid" is an even broader term, since it includes monkeys.) If a fossil is called "hominoid," it is related to us but may be more closely related to chimpanzees, gorillas, or orangutans. Hominid is a word with narrower meaning, referring to the twigs of the evolutionary tree that are more closely related to us than to any other living species. If a fossil is called a "hominid," this implies the hypothesis that the species is closer to us than it is to a chimpanzee or a gorilla. There are two main groups of hominids: the australopithecines, which came first and are all extinct, and members of the genus Homo, with all species extinct except one: Homo sapiens.

Some Common Misconceptions

Paleoanthropology has a checkered history. Until about 25 years ago, researchers often gave new names to fossil forms that were undoubtedly the same species as fossils found by competing scientists. Elaborate theories have often been based on a few teeth or a fragment of jawbone. Many misconceptions about human evolution generated during the early part of the twentieth century still persist in the minds of much of the general population, long after these myths have been debunked by fossil discoveries.

Let's first dispose of the myth that our ancestors were chimpanzees or any other modern apes. Chimpanzees and humans represent two divergent branches of the hominoid tree that evolved from a common ancestor that was neither a chimpanzee nor a human.

Another misconception envisions human evolution as a ladder with a series of steps leading directly from an ancestral hominoid to Homo sapiens. This is often illustrated as a parade of fossil hominids becoming progressively more modern as they march across the page. If human evolution is a parade, then it is a disorderly one, with many splinter groups having traveled down dead ends. At times in hominid history, several different human species coexisted (FIGURE 34.38). Human phylogeny is more like a multibranched bush than a ladder, our species being the tip of the only twig that still lives.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-38. A timeline for some hominid species. Most of these fossils come from sites in eastern and southern Africa. Note that at most times in human history, two or more hominid species were contemporaries. The names of some of the species are controversial, reflecting phylogenetic debates about what skeletal details and biogeography imply about relationships among the hominids. For example, this diagram represents the prehistoric hominids known as Neanderthals as a species separate from Homo sapiens, but some paleoanthropologists consider Neanderthals to be a subspecies of H. sapiens.

One more myth we must bury is the notion that various human characteristics, such as upright posture and an enlarged brain, evolved in unison. A popular image is of early humans as half-stooped, half-witted cave dwellers. Different features evolved at different rates--a phenomenon known as mosaic evolution--with erect posture, or bipedalism, leading the way. Our pedigree includes ancestors who walked upright but had brains much less developed than ours.

After dismissing some of the folklore on human evolution, however, we must admit that many questions about our ancestry remain.

Early Anthropoids: A Change of Environment

Our anthropoid ancestors of 30-35 million years ago were still tree dwellers. But then about 20 million years ago, the Indian plate collided with Asia and thrust up the Himalayan range. The climate became drier and the forests of what is now Africa and Asia contracted. The result was an increased area of savanna (grassland) habitat, with fewer trees. Some of the major evolutionary changes leading to the origin of our species may have occurred as our ancestors came to live less in the trees. There was then an evolutionary modification of arboreal adaptations to a new way of life, walking on the ground in more open habitats. Based on the fossil record and comparisons of DNA between humans and chimpanzees, most researchers now agree that humans and apes diverged from a common hominoid ancestor only about 5-7 million years ago.

Some Major Features of Human Evolution

Brain Size.Based on skull measurements, researchers have determined that hominoids of about 6 million years ago had brains with volumes of about 400-450 cm3. That's close to the brain volume of modern chimpanzees. In contrast, modern humans have brains averaging about 1,300 cm3 in size. This tripling of brain volume is associated with such cultural trends as the development of complex language.

Jaw Shape.Our hominoid ancestors had longer jaws--what anthropologists call prognathic jaws--than the jaws of modern humans. Chimpanzees retain this skeletal feature of prognathic jaws. During human evolution, shortening of the jaws resulted in flatter faces with more pronounced chins (compare your own face to that of the chimpanzee in FIGURE 34.37d). Along with this anatomical remodeling of the jaw, there were also changes in dentition (teeth).

Bipedal Posture.Based on the skeletal anatomy of fossils, it is clear that our hominoid ancestors walked on all four limbs when they were on the ground, as all modern apes do. The evolution of bipedal posture--upright posture and two-legged walking--is associated with key skeletal modifications that are evident in early hominid fossils.

Reduced Size Difference Between the Sexes.In hominoids, a size difference between males and females is a major feature of sexual dimorphism (see Chapter 23). On average, male gorillas and orangutans weigh about twice as much as females of their species. In chimpanzees and bonobos, the size difference is much less, with males about 1.35 times heavier than females, on average. This sexual dimorphism in size is even more reduced in humans, with males averaging about 1.2 times the weight of females.

Some Key Changes in Family Structure.The study of fossils can document evolutionary changes in skull capacity, jaw shape, bipedal posture, and, when a population has left enough fossils, even in male-female size differences. But to identify evolutionary changes in social behavior, such as family structure, researchers rely more on comparisons between humans and other extant hominoids. In contrast to the social organization of most ape species (as well as most monkeys), monogamy, with long-term pair-bonding between mates, prevails in most human cultures. Newborn human infants are exceptionally dependent on their mothers, and the duration of parental care for offspring is much longer in humans than in other hominoids (apes). This extended parental care, coupled with the large brain size, enhances learning and is associated with the behavioral complexity of humans.

Australopithecines: Early Hominids and the Origin of Bipedal Posture

Let us now see what the fossil record tells us about the evolution of such human features as shortened jaws, increased brain size, bipedal posture, and reduced size difference between males and females. All known hominid (human) fossils older than about 1.5 million years are from eastern and southern Africa. Most of these fossils are teeth and fragments of jaws, skulls, and other skeletal pieces, although paleontologists have also unearthed some spectacular skeletons that are much more complete, especially for relatively recent hominids. Researchers must try to reconstruct human phylogeny from this incomplete record, revising their hypotheses to account for new fossil evidence, as well as data from new research strategies such as molecular systematics. We will focus here mainly on the hominids known as the australopithecines, the various pre-Homo species classified in the genus Australopithecus (see FIGURE 34.38).

In 1924, British anthropologist Raymond Dart announced that a fossilized skull discovered in a South African quarry was the remains of an early human. He named his "ape-man"Australopithecus africanus ("southern ape of Africa"). With the discovery of more fossils, it became clear that A. africanus was in fact a hominid that walked fully erect (was bipedal) and had humanlike hands and teeth. However, the brain of A. africanus was only about one-third the size of a modern human's brain. Various species of Australopithecus existed for about 3 million years, beginning nearly 4 million years ago (see FIGURE 34.38).

In 1974, in the Afar region of Ethiopia, paleoanthropologists discovered an Australopithecus skeleton that was 40%  complete. "Lucy," as the fossil was named, was petite--only about 1 m tall. The skeleton is 3.24 million years old. Lucy and similar fossils have been considered sufficiently different from Australopithecus africanus to be named a separate species, Australopithecus afarensis (for the Afar region). Lucy's head was the size of a softball, indicating a brain size about the same as that of a chimpanzee of Lucy's body size. A. afarensis skulls are also apelike in being prognathic. And sexual dimorphism in size was more apelike than human, with males about 1.5 times the size of females. However, the fragments of the pelvis and skull bones indicate that A. afarensis walked on two legs (FIGURE 34.39a). Fossils discovered in the early 1990s extend the longevity of A. afarensis as a species to a span of at least one million years.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-39. Upright posture predates an enlarged brain in human evolution. (a) Lucy, a 3.24-million-year-old skeleton, represents the hominid species Australopithecus afarensis. Fragments of the pelvis and skull show that A. afarensis was bipedal, though the arms indicate that Lucy was also adapted for arboreal locomotion. (b) The Laetoli footprints, over 3.5 million years old, confirm that upright posture evolved quite early in hominid history.

At the risk of oversimplifying, one could say that A. afarensis was more apelike than human above the neck, but more humanlike below. Fossilized footprints in Laetoli, Tanzania, corroborate the skeletal evidence that homonids living at the time of A. afarensis were bipedal (FIGURE 34.39b). However, the skeletons also suggest a capacity for arboreal locomotion, with arms relatively long in proportion to body size compared to the proportions for modern humans. A. afarensis may have been able to move well both in the trees and on the ground, suggesting a mixed forest-savanna habitat.

In the past few years, paleoanthropologists have found hominid species that predate A. afarensis. The oldest fossil that is unambiguously human--that is, definitely more closely related to humans than to apes based on skeletal analysis--is Australopithecus anamensis, which lived just over 4 million years ago. And note in FIGURE 34.38 that there are even older fossils of putative hominids going back 6 million years. Thus, the australopithecine fossils indicate that hominids were bipedal at least 4 million years ago, and perhaps hundreds of thousands of years earlier. The fossil record of humanity is creeping closer to the ape-human split that molecular systematists estimate occurred about 5-7 million years ago.

One of the key questions in paleoanthropology is which of the australopithecines were evolutionary dead ends and which were either on, or close to, the phylogenetic lineage that eventually sprouted the Homo branch. For the million years that A. afarensis is represented in the fossil record, it changed little. Then, beginning about 3 million years ago, what was apparently an adaptive radiation produced several new hominid species, including A. africanus, the human first discovered by Dart 80 years ago. Either A. africanus or some closely related species was probably ancestral to two hominid branches known from later fossils. One lineage consisted of the "robust" australopithecines. They had sturdy skulls with powerful jaws and large teeth, adapted for grinding and chewing hard, tough foods. These robust forms contrast with other australopithecines, including the earlier A. afarensis and A. africanus, which were what anthropologists call "gracile" (slender) australopithecines. The gracile forms had lighter feeding equipment adapted for softer foods. Most researchers agree that the robust australopithecines were an evolutionary dead end, and that the ancestors of Homo were among the gracile australopithecines.

Homo: The Evolution of Larger Brains and the Global Dispersion of Humans

The earliest fossils that anthropologists place in our genus, Homo, are classified as Homo habilis. These fossils, ranging in age from about 2.5 to 1.6 million years old, show clear signs of some modern hominid characters above the neck. Compared to the australopithecines, H. habilis had less prognathic jaws and larger brains, about 600-750 cm3 compared to the average of 500 cm3 for Australopithecus africanus. In some cases, anthropologists have found sharp stone tools with fossils of Homo habilis, which means "handy man." After walking upright for at least 2 million years, some hominids had started to use their brains and hands to fashion tools.

A remarkably complete fossil of a young hominid known as "Turkana Boy" indicates that even larger brains had evolved by 1.6 million years ago (FIGURE 34.40). The boy had a brain that would probably be over 900 cm3 in an adult of his species. This brain size is between that of H. habilis and another species, Homo erectus. It is a reasonable hypothesis that Turkana Boy represents hominid forms linking H. habilis to H. erectus in our phylogeny.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-40. The Turkana boy. This 1.7 million-year-old fossil is anatomically intermediate between H. habilis and H. erectus. Some anthropologists classify the specimen as H. erectus, while others assign it to a separate species (H. ergaster), hypothetically ancestral to both H. erectus and H. sapiens.

Homo erectus was the first hominid species to migrate out of Africa. These humans colonized Asia, including the Indonesian archipelago, leaving fossils known by such names as "Beijing Man" and "Java Man."H. erectus lived from about 1.8 million years ago to 500,000 years ago, and had already populated Asia by at least 1.5 million years ago. Compared to H. habilis, H. erectus was taller and had a larger brain, averaging about 1,100 cm3. And H. erectus males were only about 1.2 times the size of females in the same population, a sexual dimorphism in size matching that of modern humans. Some anthropologists interpret this to mean that monogamy based on pair-bonding had evolved in H. erectus societies, replacing a more polygamous system where the largest, strongest males generally outcompeted smaller males and left the most offspring.

In addition to dispersing from Africa to Asia, H. erectus also spread into Europe, though the timing of that migration is less certain than for Asia. In Europe, H. erectus gave rise to the humans known as Neanderthals.

Neanderthals are named for the locale where their fossils were first discovered, the Neander Valley of Germany. Anthropologists now use the name for humans who lived throughout Europe from about 200,000 to 40,000 years ago. Fossilized skulls indicate that Neanderthals had brains as large as ours, though somewhat different in shape. Neanderthals were also generally more heavily built than modern humans. Despite these differences, it is unlikely that an appropriately dressed Neanderthal misplaced in time would stand out from the crowd on a city street today.

Controversy surrounds the classification of fossils of the humans that lived in Europe, Asia, and Africa from about 500,000 to 100,000 years ago. These fossils represent the various regional descendants of H. erectus, including Neanderthals. One school of researchers refers to all of these regional forms as "archaic Homo sapiens," classifying them in the same species, but with subspecies names for the regional variants. In the view of these scientists, for example, the scientific name for Neanderthals should be Homo sapiens neanderthalensis. The other school restricts the name Homo sapiens to later fossils and gives separate species names to the regional fossils of the earlier period--for example, Homo neanderthalensis for the European fossils. Though this controversy may seem like trivial semantic quibbling, it is really a debate between advocates of alternative hypotheses for the origin of modern humans.

The Origin of Anatomically Modern Humans

When and where did fully modern humans--what paleoanthropologists call anatomically modern humans--originate?

One hypothesis for the origin of fully modern humans is that Homo sapiens evolved in each region from the local populations of H. erectus. This model of parallel evolution of modern humans is called the multiregional hypothesis (FIGURE 34.41a, p. 714). It is mainly advocates of this hypothesis who refer to the regional derivatives of H. erectus as "archaic Homo sapiens," giving the geographic variants of fossils subspecies names, such as H. sapiens neanderthalensis for European forms. In this view, the great genetic similarity of all modern people is the product of occasional interbreeding between neighboring populations that has provided corridors for gene flow throughout the geographic range of humans.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-41. Two hypotheses for the origin of anatomically modern humans. (a) Multiregional hypothesis. According to the multiregional hypothesis, modern humans evolved in many parts of the world from regional descendants of Homo erectus, who dispersed from Africa between 1 and 2 million years ago. The dashed line symbolizes interbreeding and gene flow between regional populations. (b) "Out of Africa" hypothesis (replacement hypothesis). According to the "Out of Africa" hypothesis, only the African descendants of Homo erectus gave rise to modern humans. All other regional descendants of H. erectus, including Neanderthals, became extinct without contributing significantly to the gene pool of modern humanity. Advocates of this hypothesis argue that anatomically modern humans began spreading from Africa just 100,000 years ago, giving rise to all the diverse human populations on Earth today.

On the other side of a very lively debate about human origins are the proponents of the "Out of Africa" hypothesis, also called the replacement hypothesis. According to this hypothesis, all Homo sapiens throughout the world evolved from a second major migration out of Africa that occurred about 100,000 years ago--a migration of anatomically modern humans that completely replaced all the regional populations of Homo derived from the first hominid migrations of H. erectus out of Africa about 1.5 million years ago (FIGURE 34.41b). Most advocates of the replacement hypothesis prefer to give separate species names to the regional hominids that were not anatomically modern, such as Homo neanderthalensis for the Neanderthals in Europe.

Note that both hypotheses recognize the fossil evidence for humanity's African origin. The debate centers on the vintage of the most recent hominid ancestor in Africa common to all the world's modern populations. The multiregional hypothesis places that last common ancestor in Africa over 1.5 million years ago, when H. erectus began migrating to other parts of the world. But according to the replacement hypothesis, the diverse human populations of the world are much more closely related. In this view, all of the world's populations diverged from anatomically modern Homo sapiens that evolved from an African H. erectus population and then migrated throughout the world beginning only 100,000 years ago. These anatomically modern humans--Homo sapiens--completely replaced all the other regional descendants of H. erectus, including Neanderthals, which are therefore evolutionary dead ends in the view of the replacement hypothesis.

A third alternative to the multiregional and replacement hypotheses suggests that Homo sapiens dispersing from Africa 100,000 years ago interbred with the regional descendants of the earlier H. erectus migration. This hypothesis predicts that the genomes of the indigenous people around the globe today should reflect a complex mix of ancestries. More generally, the key to our past, and a way to test the predictions made by the competing hypotheses, is to assess our current genetic diversity.

So far, the genetic data have mostly supported the replacement hypothesis. One approach has been to compare the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) between population samples from various parts of the world. Using changes in the mtDNA as a molecular clock (see Chapter 25), researchers have reported a time of genetic divergence of about 100,000 years ago, consistent with the replacement hypothesis. Some other researchers question the reliability of this approach. However, studies of genetic markers from the nucleus have corroborated the mtDNA data in tracing the geographic branching of Homo sapiens to about 100,000 years ago. And in the late 1990s, the replacement hypothesis accrued further support from researchers who sequenced mtDNA extracted from Neanderthal bones. The multiregional hypothesis predicts that the mtDNA of modern Europeans should be more similar to this Neanderthal mtDNA than to mtDNA from modern humans indigenous to other geographic regions. But the mtDNA from four Neanderthals all fall completely outside the range of mtDNA for modern Europeans. These data suggest that Neanderthals contributed nothing to the ancestry of anatomically modern humans in Europe. So far, however, there have been no such comparisons of DNA between local fossils and local indigenous people in regions outside Europe, such as Asia.

In testing the predictions of contesting hypotheses on the origin of modern humans, perhaps the most important genetic data so far are comparisons of Y chromosomes that a large research team published in 2001. In contrast to other human chromosomes, copies of a Y chromosome transmitted from male to male through the generations of a family retain their genetic identity because there is no crossing over for the Y chromosome during meiosis (except for a very small portion, which may cross over with the X chromosome). The diversity among Y chromosomes is thus limited to mutations, which serve as markers for tracing the ancestry and relationships among males alive today. By comparing the Y chromosomes of males from various geographic regions, researchers were able to infer divergence from a common African ancestor less than 100,000 years ago. As one former advocate of the multiregional hypothesis put it when he learned of these Y-chromosome data: "I have undergone a conversion--a sort of epiphany. There are no old Y chromosome lineages [in modern humans]. There are no old mtDNA lineages. Period. It was total replacement." However, not all multiregionalists find the genetic data so conclusive.

So far, the fossil evidence has been less one-sided than the genetic data in testing the alternative explanations for the origin of modern humans. The fossil evidence in western Europe is consistent with a total replacement of Neanderthals about 40,000 years ago by anatomically modern humans, known as Cro-Magnons in the case of the European fossils. There is no evidence for a transition in skeletal morphology that would suggest interbreeding between Neanderthals and the later arrivals. Thus, for western Europe, at least, the fossil evidence corroborates the genetic evidence in support of the replacement hypothesis. However, the fossil data outside of Europe are more ambiguous. For example, some paleoanthropologists interpret certain Asian fossils to be intermediate between older fossils of H. erectus in Asia and skeletal features of modern Asians, a result predicted by the multiregional hypothesis (or implying interbreeding with H. erectus after modern humans arrived in Asia).

Scientific debates about our evolutionary history, including the origin of anatomically modern humans, will certainly continue to make paleonanthropology one of the most exciting research fields in science.

Though we are ending this unit of chapters on the evolution of biological diversity with the origin of modern humans, we do not mean to reinforce the common misconception of a "ladder of life leading from lowly microbes to lofty humanity." Biological diversity is the product of branching phylogeny, not ladderlike "progress," however we choose to measure it. The fact that there are more species of bony fishes alive today than all other verterbrates combined is a clear indication that our finned relatives are not outmoded underachievers that failed to get out of the water. The tetrapods--amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals--are derived from one fish population. As tetrapods diversified on land, fishes continued their branching evolution in the greatest portion of the biosphere's volume. Similarly, the ubiquitous presence of diverse prokaryotes throughout the biosphere today is a reminder of the enduring ability of these relatively simple organisms to keep up with the times through adaptive evolution. Biology exalts life's diversity, past and present.




