
 The energy transformations of life are subject t+o two laws of thermodynamics

The study of the energy transformations that occur in a collection of matter is called thermodynamics. Scientists use the word system to denote the matter under study and refer to the rest of the universe--everything outside the system--as the surroundings. A closed system, such as that approximated by liquid in a thermos bottle, is isolated from its surroundings. In an open system, energy (and often matter) can be transferred between the system and its surroundings. Organisms are open systems. They absorb energy--for instance, light energy or chemical energy in the form of organic molecules--and release heat and metabolic waste products, such as carbon dioxide, to the surroundings. Two laws of thermodynamics govern energy transformations in organisms and all other collections of matter (FIGURE 6.3).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 6-3. Two laws of thermodynamics. (a) The chemical (potential) energy in the gasoline will be converted to kinetic energy of the car's movement. (b) Disorder is added to the car's surrounding in the form of heat and the small molecules that are breakdown products of gasoline.

The First Law of Thermodynamics

According to the first law of thermodynamics, the energy of the universe is constant. Energy can be transferred and transformed, but it cannot be created or destroyed. The first law is also known as the principle of conservation of energy. The electric company does not manufacture energy, but merely converts it to a form that is convenient to use. By converting light to chemical energy, a green plant acts as an energy transformer, not an energy producer.

The car in FIGURE 6.3a will convert the chemical energy of gasoline fuels to kinetic and other forms of energy as it is driven away from the gas station. What happens to this energy after it has performed work in a machine or an organism? If energy cannot be destroyed, what prevents organisms from behaving like closed systems and recycling their energy? The second law answers these questions.

The Second Law of Thermodynamics

The second law of thermodynamics can be stated many ways. Let's begin with the following statement of the second law: Every energy transfer or transformation makes the universe more disordered. Scientists use a quantity called entropy as a measure of disorder, or randomness. The more random a collection of matter is, the greater its entropy. We can therefore restate the second law as follows: Every energy transfer or transformation increases the entropy of the universe. Although order can increase locally, there is an unstoppable trend toward randomization of the universe as a whole.

In many cases, increased entropy is evident in the physical disintegration of a system's organized structure. For example, you can observe increasing entropy in the gradual decay of an unmaintained building. Much of the increasing entropy of the universe is less apparent, however, because it takes the form of an increasing amount of heat, which is the energy of random molecular motion. As the car in FIGURE 6.3b converts chemical energy to kinetic energy, it is also increasing the disorder of its surroundings in the form of heat and the small molecules that are the breakdown products of gasoline.

In most energy transformations, ordered forms of energy are at least partly converted to heat. Only about 25%  of the chemical energy stored in the fuel tank of an automobile is transformed into the motion of the car; the remaining 75%  is lost from the engine as heat, which dissipates rapidly through the surroundings. Similarly, the children in FIGURE 6.2 convert only a fraction of the energy stored in their food to the kinetic energy of ladder climbing and other play. In performing various kinds of work, living cells unavoidably convert organized forms of energy to heat. (This can make a room crowded with people uncomfortably warm.)

In machines and organisms, even energy that performs useful work is eventually converted to heat. The organized energy of an automobile's forward movement becomes heat when the friction of the brakes and tires stops the car. Conversion to heat is the fate of all the chemical energy a child uses to climb a slide: Metabolic breakdown of food generates heat during the climb, and the fraction of energy temporarily stored as gravitational potential energy is converted to heat on the way down, as friction warms the surrounding air.

Conversion of other forms of energy to heat does not violate the first law of thermodynamics. Energy has been conserved, because heat is a form of energy, though energy in its most random state. By combining the first and second laws of thermodynamics, we can conclude that the quantity of energy in the universe is constant, but its quality is not. In a sense, heat is the lowest grade of energy, as uncoordinated movement of molecules. A system can put heat to work only when there is a temperature difference that results in the heat flowing from a warmer location to a cooler one. If temperature is uniform, as it is in a living cell, then the only use for heat energy is to warm a body of matter, such as an organism.

How can we reconcile the second law of thermodynamics--the unstoppable increase in the entropy of the universe--with the orderliness of life (FIGURE 6.4), which is one of this book's themes? The key is to remember another theme: Organisms are open systems that exchange energy and materials with their surroundings. It is true that cells create ordered structures from less organized starting materials. For example, amino acids are ordered into the specific sequences of polypeptide chains. But an organism also takes in organized forms of matter and energy from the surroundings and replaces them with less ordered forms. For example, an animal obtains starch, proteins, and other complex molecules from the food it eats. As catabolic pathways break these molecules down, the animal releases carbon dioxide and water--small, simple molecules that store less chemical energy than the food did. The depletion of chemical energy is accounted for by heat generated during metabolism. On a larger scale, energy flows into an ecosystem in the form of light and leaves in the form of heat. Living systems increase the entropy of their surroundings, as predicted by thermodynamic law.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 6-4. Order as a characteristic of life. Order is evident in the detailed anatomy of this root tissue from a buttercup plant (the micrograph shows a cross section). As open systems, organisms can increase their order at the expense of the order of their surroundings.

During the early history of life, complex organisms evolved from simpler ancestors. For example, we can trace the ancestry of the plant kingdom to much simpler organisms called green algae. However, this increase in organization over time in no way violates the second law. The entropy of a particular system, such as an organism, may actually decrease, so long as the total entropy of the universe--the system plus its surroundings--increases. Thus, organisms are islands of low entropy in an increasingly random universe. The evolution of biological order is perfectly consistent with the laws of thermodynamics.




