
IMMUNE RESPONSES

 

 Helper T lymphocytes function in both humoral and cell-mediated immunity:



 

 In the cell-mediated response, cytotoxic T cells counter intracellular pathogens:



 

 In the humoral response, B cells make antibodies against extracellular pathogens:



 

 Invertebrates have a rudimentary immune system



The immune system can mount two types of responses to antigens: a humoral response and a cell-mediated response. Humoral immunity involves B cell activation and results from the production of antibodies that circulate in the blood plasma and lymph, fluids that were long ago called humors. Around the end of the nineteenth century, researchers performed an experiment in which they transferred such fluids from animals that had recovered from an infection to others that had not been exposed to it. For a short time the latter animals were protected from the infection. The investigators had transferred humoral immunity (antibodies) from animal to animal. They also found that immunity to some infections could be passed along only if cells, later identified as T lymphocytes, were transferred. This second type of immunity, which depends on the action of T cells, became known as cell-mediated immunity.

The circulating antibodies of the humoral response defend mainly against free bacteria, toxins, and viruses present in body fluids. In contrast, the T cells of the cell-mediated response are active against viruses and bacteria within infected body cells and against fungi, protozoa, and parasitic worms. Cell-mediated immunity is crucial in the body's response against transplanted tissue and cancer cells, both of which are perceived as "nonself."FIGURE 43.10 provides an overview of the humoral and cell-mediated responses, the two branches of the immune system, which we will explore shortly. In addition to introducing these two branches, the figure shows the connections linking them--cell-signaling interactions among the lymphocytes. Central to this network of cell-signaling is the helper T cell, which responds to antigen presented by a macrophage and stimulates both B cells and other T cells.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 43-10. An overview of the immune responses. In this simplified flowchart, green arrows track the primary response, and blue arrows track the secondary response. Notice the connections between the humoral response and the cell-mediated response and the central role of the helper T cell. APC stands for antigen-presenting cell.




