
 Research on how plants grow toward light led to the discovery of plant hormones

The concept of chemical messengers in plants emerged from a series of classic experiments on how stems respond to light. A houseplant on a windowsill grows toward light. If you rotate the plant, it will soon reorient its growth until its leaves again face the window. Any growth response that results in curvatures of whole plant organs toward or away from stimuli is called a tropism (from the Greek tropos, turn). The growth of a shoot toward light is called positive phototropism (growth away from light is negative phototropism).

In a forest or other natural ecosystem where plants may be crowded, phototropism directs growing seedlings toward the sunlight that powers photosynthesis. What is the mechanism for this adaptive response? Much of what is known about phototropism has been learned from studies of grass seedlings, particularly oats. The shoot of a grass seedling is enclosed in a sheath called the coleoptile, which grows straight upward if the seedling is kept in the dark or if it is illuminated uniformly from all sides. If the growing coleoptile is illuminated from one side, it will curve toward the light (see the photograph that opens the chapter). This response results from a differential growth of cells on opposite sides of the coleoptile; the cells on the darker side elongate faster than the cells on the brighter side.

Charles Darwin and his son, Francis, conducted some of the earliest experiments on phototropism in the late 19th century. They observed that a grass seedling could bend toward light only if the tip of the coleoptile was present (FIGURE 39.4). If the tip was removed, the coleoptile would not curve. The seedling would also fail to grow toward light if the tip was covered with an opaque cap; neither a transparent cap over the tip nor an opaque shield placed farther down the coleoptile prevented the phototropic response. It was the tip of the coleoptile, the Darwins concluded, that was responsible for sensing light. However, the actual growth response, the curvature of the coleoptile, occurred some distance below the tip. The Darwins postulated that some signal was transmitted downward from the tip to the elongating region of the coleoptile. A few decades later, Peter Boysen-Jensen of Denmark tested this hypothesis and demonstrated that the signal was a mobile chemical substance. He separated the tip from the remainder of the coleoptile by a block of gelatin, which would prevent cellular contact but allow chemicals to pass. These seedlings behaved normally, bending toward light. However, if the tip was experimentally segregated from the lower coleoptile by an impermeable barrier, no phototropic response occurred.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 39-4. Early experiments of phototropism. Only the tip of the coleoptile can sense the direction of light, but the bending response occurs some distance below the tip. A signal of some kind must travel downward from the tip. The signal can pass through a permeable barrier (gelatin block) but not through a solid barrier (a mineral called mica), suggesting that the signal for phototropism is a mobile chemical.

In 1926, F. W. Went, a Dutch graduate student, extracted the chemical messenger for phototropism by modifying the experiments of Boysen-Jensen (FIGURE 39.5). Went removed the coleoptile tip and placed it on a block of agar, a gelatinous material. The chemical messenger from the tip, Went reasoned, should diffuse into the agar, and the agar block should then be able to substitute for the coleoptile tip. Went placed the agar blocks on decapitated coleoptiles that were kept in the dark. A block that was centered on top of the coleoptile caused the stem to grow straight upward. However, if the block was placed off center, then the coleoptile began to bend away from the side with the agar block, as though growing toward light. Went concluded that the agar block contained a chemical produced in the coleoptile tip, that this chemical stimulated growth as it passed down the coleoptile, and that a coleoptile curved toward light because of a higher concentration of the growth-promoting chemical on the darker side of the coleoptile. For this chemical messenger, or hormone, Went chose the name auxin (from the Greek auxein, to increase). Auxin was later purified and its structure determined by Kenneth Thimann and his colleagues at the California Institute of Technology.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 39-5. The Went experiments. Some chemical (indicated by pink) that can pass into an agar block from a coleoptile tip stimulates elongation of the coleoptile when the block is substituted for a tip. If the block is placed off-center on the top of a decapitated coleoptile kept in the dark, the organ bends as if responding to illumination from one side. The chemical is the hormone auxin, which stimulates elongation of cells in the shoot.

The classical hypothesis for what causes grass coleoptiles to grow toward light, based on the work of the Darwins and Went, is that an asymmetrical distribution of auxin moving down from the coleoptile tip causes cells on the darker side to elongate faster than cells on the brighter side. However, studies of phototropism by organs other than grass coleoptiles provide less support for this idea. For example, there is no evidence that unilateral light causes an asymmetrical distribution of auxin in the stems of sunflowers, radishes, and other dicots. There is, however, an asymmetrical distribution of certain substances that may act as growth inhibitors, with these substances more concentrated on the lighted side of a stem. Still, the specific case of auxin's role in the phototropism of grass coleoptiles opened up the whole field of research on plant hormones.




