
 Steroid hormones, thyroid hormones, and some local regulators enter target cells and bind to intracellular receptors

The first indication that some hormones do enter their target cells came from the study of the vertebrate hormones estrogen and progesterone. In most mammals, including humans, these steroid hormones are necessary for the normal development and function of the female reproductive system. In the early 1960s, researchers demonstrated that cells in the reproductive tract of female rats accumulate estrogen. The hormone was found within the nuclei of these cells, but not in the cells of such tissues as the spleen, which do not respond to estrogen. Progesterone also enters the nuclei of target cells. Such observations led to the hypothesis that cells sensitive to a steroid hormone contain internal receptor molecules that bind specifically to that hormone. We now know that intracellular proteins are the receptors for steroid hormones, thyroid hormones, the hormonal form of vitamin D, and some local regulators, such as NO--all small nonpolar molecules that pass easily through cell membranes. Most intracellular receptors are located in the nucleus (see FIGURE 45.3b); others are in the cytoplasm, at least initially (see FIGURE 11.10).

Intracellular receptor proteins usually perform the entire task of transducing the signal within the cell. The chemical signal activates the receptor, which then directly triggers the cell's response. In almost all cases, the intracellular receptor activated by a hormone is a transcription factor, and the response is a change in gene expression. The active form of the factor--the hormone-receptor complex--binds to specific sites in the cell's DNA and either stimulates or represses the transcription of specific genes (see FIGURES 17.7 and 19.9). Newly made mRNA is then translated into new protein in the cytoplasm.

The arthropod molting hormone ecdysone (see FIGURE 45.2) is an example of a steroid that brings about the synthesis of new proteins. Ecdysone causes certain cells of an arthropod to synthesize the enzymes that catalyze the production of a new exoskeleton. In another example, estrogen induces cells in the reproductive system of a female bird to synthesize large amounts of ovalbumin, the main protein of egg white.

As with hormones that bind to cell-surface receptors, hormones that bind to intracellular receptors may have different effects on different target cells within an animal. For example, the estrogen that stimulates a bird's reproductive system to make ovalbumin causes its liver to make other proteins. And from that example you can see that the same hormone may have different effects in different species--human females do not respond to estrogen by making ovalbumin! Another example of a species difference in hormone response involves thyroxine, a thyroid hormone. In human and other vertebrates, thyroxine is responsible for metabolic regulation. But in frogs, thyroxine also triggers the metamorphosis of a tadpole into an adult, stimulating resorption of the tadpole's tail and other changes.




