
 The skin and mucous membranes provide first-line barriers to infection

Intact skin is a barrier that cannot normally be penetrated by bacteria or viruses, although even minute abrasions may allow their passage. Likewise, the mucous membranes that line the digestive, respiratory, and genitourinary tracts bar the entry of potentially harmful microbes (see FIGURE 40.1). Beyond their role as a physical barrier, the skin and mucous membranes counter pathogens with chemical defenses. In humans, for example, secretions from sebaceous and sweat glands give the skin a pH ranging from 3 to 5, which is acidic enough to prevent colonization by many microbes. (Bacteria that make up the skin's normal flora are adapted to its acidic, relatively dry environment.) Microbial colonization is also inhibited by the washing action of saliva, tears, and mucous secretions that continually bathe the surfaces of exposed epithelia. In addition, all these secretions contain antimicrobial proteins. One of these protective proteins is the enzyme lysozyme (see FIGURE 5.17), which digests the cell walls of many bacteria and thus destroys many bacteria entering the upper respiratory tract and the openings around the eyes.

Mucus, the viscous fluid secreted by cells of mucous membranes, also traps microbes and other particles that contact it. In the trachea, ciliated epithelial cells sweep out mucus with its trapped microbes, preventing them from entering the lungs (FIGURE 43.2). Microbes present in food or water, or those in swallowed mucus, must contend with the highly acidic environment of the stomach. The acid destroys many microbes before they can enter the intestinal tract. There are exceptions, however: Hepatitis A virus, for example, is one of many pathogens that survives gastric acidity and gains access to the body via the digestive tract.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 43-2. First-line respiratory defenses. In the lining of the trachea, shown here, specialized cells (orange) produce mucus that traps microbes before the invaders can enter the lungs. The mucous membrane is also equipped with ciliated cells (yellow). Synchronized beating of the cilia expels mucus and the trapped microbes upward into the pharynx (colorized SEM).




