
Chapter 33: INVERTEBRATES

PARAZOA

   Phylum Porifera: Sponges are sessile with porous bodies and choanocytes



RADIATA

   Phylum Cnidaria: Cnidarians have radial symmetry, a gastrovascular cavity, and cnidocytes

   Phylum Ctenophora: Comb jellies possess rows of ciliary plates and adhesive colloblasts



PROTOSTOMIA: LOPHOTROCHOZOA

   Phylum Platyhelminthes: Flatworms are acoelomates with gastrovascular cavities

   Phylum Rotifera: Rotifers are pseudocoelomates with jaws, crowns of cilia, and complete digestive tracts

   The lophophorate phyla: Bryozoans, phoronids, and brachiopods are coelomates with ciliated tentacles around their mouths

   Phylum Nemertea: Proboscis worms are named for their prey-capturing apparatus

   Phylum Mollusca: Mollusks have a muscular foot, a visceral mass, and a mantle

   Phylum Annelida: Annelids are segmented worms



PROTOSTOMIA: ECDYSOZOA

   Phylum Nematoda: Roundworms are nonsegmented pseudocoelomates covered by tough cuticles

   Arthropods are segmented coelomates with exoskeletons and jointed appendages



DEUTEROSTOMIA

   Phylum Echinodermata: Echinoderms have a water vascular system and secondary radial anatomy

   Phylum Chordata: The chordates include two invertebrate subphyla and all vertebrates

More than a million extant species of animals are known, and at least as many more will probably be identified by future generations of biologists. Animals are grouped into about 35 phyla, the exact number depending on the views of different systematists. Our survey of animal diversity focuses on just 15 of these phyla.

Animals inhabit nearly all environments on Earth, but most phyla consist mainly of aquatic species. The seas, where the first animals probably arose, are still home to the greatest number of animal phyla. The freshwater fauna is extensive, but not nearly as rich in diversity as the marine fauna.

Terrestrial habitats pose special problems for animals, as they do for plants (see Chapter 29), and few animal phyla have made successful evolutionary treks onto land. Earthworms (phylum Annelida) and land snails (phylum Mollusca) are generally confined to moist soil and vegetation. Only the vertebrates and arthropods, including insects and spiders, are represented by a great diversity of animal species adapted to various terrestrial environments.

Living as we do on land, our sense of animal diversity is biased in favor of vertebrates, the animals with backbones, which are well represented in terrestrial environments. But vertebrates make up one subphylum within phylum Chordata, less than 5%  of all animal species. If we were to sample the animals inhabiting a tidepool (as in the photograph on this page), a coral reef, or the rocks on a stream bottom, we would find ourselves in the realm of invertebrates, the animals without backbones. The diversity of invertebrates is the main subject of this chapter.

Our survey of invertebrate phyla will follow the branching pattern of the phylogenetic tree inFIGURE 33.1. This tree is based mainly on molecular data, as discussed in Chapter 32 (seeFIGURE 32.8, p. 640). However, much of our discussion of the diverse phyla will center on key differences in body "plan," the grades inFIGURE 32.4on page 636.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-1. Review of animal phylogeny. This tree is a streamlined version of FIGURE 32.8 (p. 640). We'll use an even simpler miniature of the tree throughout this chapter, with individual branches sequentially highlighted to help place each clade in the overall context of animal phylogeny. Your instructor may prefer to connect his or her survey of animal phyla to FIGURE 32.4 (p. 636), which is based on evolutionary grades in the body plans of animals.




