
 Arranging the diversity of life into the highest taxa is a work in progress

Like any classification scheme, the five-kingdom system is not a natural fact but a human construct. It is one attempt to order the diversity of life into a scheme that is useful and, hopefully, phylogenetically reasonable. During the past three decades, systematists applying cladistic analysis, including the construction of cladograms based on molecular data (see Chapter 25), have been pointing out problems with the traditional five-kingdom scheme.

One challenge to the five-kingdom system is the evidence that there are two distinct lineages of prokaryotes. These new data led to a three-domain system (FIGURE 26.16a and b). The three domains, Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya, are essentially superkingdoms, a taxonomic level even higher than the kingdom level. Note that the three-domain system makes the kingdom Monera obsolete, since it would have members in two different domains. In fact, many microbiologists now divide each of the two prokaryotic domains into multiple kingdoms based on cladistic analysis of molecular data (see FIGURE 26.16c).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 26-16. Our changing view of biological diversity.

The second major challenge to the five-kingdom system is being mounted by systematists who are sorting out the phylogeny of the diverse eukaryotes formerly collected in the kingdom Protista. Molecular systematics and cladistics have revealed that Protista is not a monophyletic grouping (see Chapter 25 to review cladistics). The specialists who study these organisms now split most of them into five or more newly designated kingdoms, but have also assigned certain groups that used to be included in Protista to Plantae, Fungi, and Animalia (see FIGURE 26.16c).

Clearly, taxonomy at the highest levels is a work in progress. It may seem ironic that systematists are generally more confident in their groupings of species into lower taxa such as genera and families than they are about the evolutionary relationships among the major groups of organisms. But this makes sense when you consider our own family genealogies. It's easier to sort out our relationships to siblings and cousins than it is to identify more distant relatives, such as third or fourth cousins, by tracing our genealogies back to ancestors who lived long ago. Similarly, tracing phylogeny at the kingdom level takes us back to the evolutionary branching that occurred in Precambrian seas a billion or more years ago.

There will be much more research before there is anything close to a new consensus for how the three domains of life are related and how many kingdoms in each domain of life are required to have a classification that reflects evolutionary history. And even then, new data will undoubtedly lead to further taxonomic remodeling. As we survey the diversity of life in the chapters that follow, keep in mind that phylogenetic trees and taxonomic groupings are hypotheses that fit the best available data. It is this continuing scrutiny of testable hypotheses that validates evolutionary biology as a natural science.




