
 Protists are the most diverse of all eukaryotes

Given the taxonomic fragmentation of the protists into multiple kingdoms, you shouldn't be surprised that protists are so diverse that few general characteristics can be cited without exceptions. In fact, protists vary in structure and function more than any other group of organisms. Most of the approximately 60,000 known species of extant protists are unicellular, but there are also some colonial and multicellular species (see FIGURE 28.1). Because most protists are unicellular, they are justifiably considered the simplest eukaryotic organisms. But at the cellular level, many protists are exceedingly complex--the most elaborate of all cells. We should expect this of organisms that must carry out within the boundaries of a single cell all the basic functions performed by the specialized cells that make up the bodies of plants and animals. Each unicellular protist is not at all analogous to a single cell from a human or other multicellular organism, but is itself an organism as complete as any whole plant or animal.

Nutrition

Protists are the most nutritionally diverse of all eukaryotes. Most protists are aerobic in their metabolism, using mitochondria for cellular respiration (a few lack mitochondria and either live in anaerobic environments or contain mutualistic respiring bacteria). Some protists are photoautotrophs, containing chloroplasts; some are heterotrophs, absorbing organic molecules or ingesting larger food particles; and still others, called mixotrophs, combine photosynthesis and heterotrophic nutrition (an example is Euglena, shown in FIGURE 28.3).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 28-3. Euglena: an example of a single-celled protist. This protist, one of the most common inhabitants of murky pond water, is mixotrophic: In light, its chloroplasts are photosynthetic; if placed in the dark, the organism can live as a heterotroph by absorbing organic nutrients from the environment. Some related species lack chloroplasts and ingest food by phagocytosis.

The different modes of nutrition are scattered throughout the various phylogenetic lineages of protists. For example, there are photosynthetic species in many different protistan groups. And the same group may include photosynthetic species, heterotrophic species, and mixotrophs. Thus, nutrition is not a reliable taxonomic characteristic. However, nutrition is useful in an ecological context to help us understand the adaptations of protists and the roles they play in biological communities. In this ecological context, we can divide protists into three categories: ingestive (animal-like) protists, or protozoa (singular, protozoan); absorptive (funguslike) protists (these have no other general name); and photosynthetic (plantlike) protists, or algae (singular, alga). The term alga refers to relatively simple aquatic photoautotrophs, including some organisms that some biologists include in the plant kingdom. Though commonly used, the terms protozoa and algae have no basis in phylogeny and no significance in taxonomy.

Motility

Most protists are motile, usually having flagella or cilia at some time in their life cycles. It is important to understand that prokaryotic and eukaryotic versions of flagella are not homologous structures. Prokaryotic flagella are attached to the cell surface (see FIGURE 27.7). In contrast, eukaryotic flagella and cilia are extensions of the cytoplasm, with bundles of microtubules covered by the plasma membrane (see FIGURE 7.24). Eukaryotic cilia and flagella have the same basic ultrastructure (the 9 + 2 arrangement of microtubules), but cilia are shorter and more numerous.

Life Cycles

Reproduction and life cycles are highly varied among protists. Mitosis occurs in almost all protists, but there are many variations in the process unknown in other eukaryotes. Some protists are exclusively asexual; others can also reproduce sexually or at least employ the sexual processes of meiosis and syngamy (the union of two gametes), thereby shuffling genes between two individuals that then go on to reproduce asexually. In Chapter 13, you learned about three basic types of sexual life cycles that differ in the timing of meiosis and syngamy (see FIGURE 13.5). All three types are represented among protists, along with some variations that do not quite fit any of the three basic life cycle patterns. However, the haploid stage is the main vegetative (feeding and growing) stage of most protists, with the only diploid cell being the zygote.

At some point in the life cycle of many protists, resistant cells called cysts are formed that can survive harsh conditions. Microfossils resembling the ruptured cysts of some algae are among the oldest remnants of eukaryotic life in the Precambrian era.

Protistan Habitats

Most protists are aquatic organisms. They are found almost anywhere there is water, including damp soil, leaf litter, and other terrestrial habitats that are sufficiently moist. In oceans, ponds, and lakes, many protists are bottom dwellers that attach themselves to rocks and other anchorages or creep through the sand and silt. Protists are also important constituents of plankton (from the Greek planktos, wandering), the communities of organisms, mostly microscopic, that drift passively or swim weakly near the water surface. Phytoplankton (planktonic eukaryotic algae, along with the prokaryotic cyanobacteria) are the bases of most marine and freshwater food webs. Accounting for at least half the photosynthetic production of organic material globally, phytoplankton supports an enormous abundance and diversity of heterotrophic protists, prokaryotes, and animals.

In addition to free-living protists are the many symbionts that inhabit the body fluids, tissues, or cells of hosts. These symbiotic relationships span the continuum from mutualism to parasitism. Some parasitic protists are important pathogens of animals, including many, like the agent of malaria, that cause potentially fatal diseases in humans.

In this introduction to the protists, we have previewed the enormous diversity of these organisms. The one characteristic they do share is that their cells are eukaryotic, as are those of plants, animals, and fungi. Before taking a closer look at the diversity of protists, let's consider the origin of the domain Eukarya from prokaryotic ancestors.




