
 Enzymes are substrate specific

The reactant an enzyme acts on is referred to as the enzyme's substrate. The enzyme binds to its substrate (or substrates, when there are two or more reactants). While enzyme and substrate are joined, the catalytic action of the enzyme converts the substrate to the product (or products) of the reaction. The overall process can be summarized as follows, with the name of the enzyme written above the reaction arrow:  For example, the enzyme sucrase (most enzyme names end in -ase) breaks the disaccharide sucrose into its two monosaccharides, glucose and fructose (see FIGURE 6.11):  An enzyme can distinguish its substrate from even closely related compounds, such as isomers, so that each type of enzyme catalyzes a particular reaction. For instance, sucrase will act only on sucrose and will reject other disaccharides, such as maltose. What accounts for this molecular recognition? Recall that enzymes are proteins, and proteins are macromolecules with unique three-dimensional conformations. The specificity of an enzyme results from its shape.

Only a restricted region of the enzyme molecule actually binds to the substrate. This region, called the active site, is typically a pocket or groove on the surface of the protein (FIGURE 6.14a). Usually, the active site is formed by only a few of the enzyme's amino acids, with the rest of the protein molecule providing a framework that reinforces the configuration of the active site. The specificity of an enzyme is attributed to a compatible fit between the shape of its active site and the shape of the substrate. The active site, however, is not a rigid receptacle for the substrate. As the substrate enters the active site, it induces the enzyme to change its shape slightly so that the active site fits even more snugly around the substrate (FIGURE 6.14b). This induced fit is like a clasping handshake. Induced fit brings chemical groups of the active site into positions that enhance their ability to catalyze the chemical reaction.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 6-14. The induced fit between an enzyme and its substrate. (a) The active site of this enzyme (hexokinase) can be seen in this computer graphic model as a groove on the surface of the protein (blue). (b) On entering the active site, the substrate, which is glucose (red), induces a change in the shape of the protein that causes the active site to embrace the substrate.




