
 Bryophyte sporophytes disperse enormous numbers of spores

The cells of bryophyte sporophytes contain plastids that are usually green and photosynthetic when the sporophytes are young. Even so, bryophyte sporophytes are not capable of living apart from their maternal gametophytes. A bryophyte sporophyte remains attached to its parental gametophyte throughout the sporophyte's lifetime, dependent on the gametophyte for supplies of sugars, amino acids, minerals, and water.

Bryophytes have the smallest and simplest sporophytes of all modern plant groups, consistent with the hypothesis that sporophytes started small and simple, with larger and more complex sporophytes evolving only later in vascular plants. Among bryophytes, liverworts have the simplest sporophytes. You would need to use a magnifying glass to see their tiny bodies, which consist of a short stalk bearing a round sporangium with a protective epidermis enclosing developing spores. At the other end of the stalk, a nutritive foot is embedded in gametophyte tissues (FIGURE 29.17). Hornwort and moss sporophytes are larger and more complex. For example, hornwort sporophytes, which superficially resemble grass blades (see FIGURE 29.15b), possess a cuticle. The sporophytes of hornworts and mosses possess epidermal stomata similar to those of vascular plants.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 29-17. Sporophyte of Marchantia, a liverwort. The tiny spore-producing sporophyte remains attached to the tissues of the parent gametophyte, which continues to nourish the sporophyte (LM).

Moss sporophytes are fairly conspicuous and familiar to most people. Though green and photosynthetic when young, moss sporophytes turn tan or brownish red when they are ready to release their spores, often remaining visible for months after spore discharge has occurred (see FIGURE 29.15c). Moss sporophytes consist of a foot, an elongated stalk known as a seta, and a spore-producing organ, the sporangium, or capsule (see FIGURE 29.16). The foot gathers sugars, amino acids, water, and minerals from the parent gametophyte via transfer cells. The seta conducts these materials to the capsule, which uses the resources to produce spores. In most mosses, the seta becomes elongated, which elevates the capsule and enhances spore dispersal.

The moss capsule (sporangium) is the site of meiosis and spore production; up to 50 million spores can be generated by one capsule. When the capsule is immature, it is covered with a protective cap of gametophyte tissue, the calyptra, but this cap is lost when the capsule is ready to release spores. The upper part of the capsule, known as a peristome, is often specialized for gradual spore discharge (FIGURE 29.18). As a result, the capsule sprinkles spores rather than dumping them out all at once. This gradual release allows mosses to take advantage of periodic wind gusts that can carry spores long distances.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 29-18. A moss sporangium with a "spore-shaker" tip. At the tip of the sporangium of the moss Brachythecium, two rings of "teeth" regulate the gradual release of spores from the capsule. When conditions are moist, the two rings of teeth interlock and keep the spores inside the capsule. Drying causes the teeth to separate, allowing spores to disperse from the "shaker" you see here (SEM).




