
 The same neurotransmitter can produce different effects on different types of cells

Dozens of different substances, many of them small, nitrogen containing organic molecules, are known to function as neurotransmitters, and researchers expect to find many more. Table 48.1 summarizes the major known neurotransmitters. Notice that a particular neurotransmitter can trigger different responses in postsynaptic cells. This versatility depends on the receptors present on different postsynaptic cells and on the receptor's mode of action. Many neurotransmitters bind with receptors that have a direct effect on ion channel proteins, altering the membrane permeability of the postsynaptic cell (see FIGURE 48.12). This type of synaptic communication can take only a few milliseconds, serving the rapid and precise transfer of information at a single synapse. Other neurotransmitters take much longer (up to several minutes) because they communicate via complex signal-transduction pathways in the postsynaptic cell. In some cases neurotransmitters in the brain--such as those regulating mood, attention, and arousal--remain active long enough after their release to diffuse to many synapses and modulate their activity.

Table 48-1. The Major Known Neurotransmitters

NeurotransmitterStructureFunctional ClassSecretion SitesAcetylcholineExcitatory to vertebrate skeletal muscles; excitatory or inhibitory at other sitesCNS; PNS; vertebrate neuromuscular junctionBiogenic AminesNorepinephrineExcitatory or inhibitoryCNS; PNSDopamineGenerally excitatory; may be inhibitory at some sitesCNS; PNSSerotoninGenerally inhibitoryCNSAmino AcidsGABA (gamma aminobutyric acid)InhibitoryCNS; invertebrate neuromuscular junctionGlycineInhibitoryCNSGlutamateExcitatoryCNS; invertebrate neuromuscular junctionAspartateExcitatoryCNSNeuropeptidesSubstance PExcitatoryCNS; PNSMet-enkephalin (an endorphin)Generally inhibitoryCNSAcetylcholine

Acetylcholine is one of the most common neurotransmitters in both invertebrates and vertebrates. In the vertebrate central nervous system, acetylcholine can be inhibitory or excitatory, depending on the type of receptor. At the vertebrate neuromuscular junction, the synapse between a motor neuron and a skeletal muscle cell, acetylcholine is released from the synaptic terminal of the motor neuron. It binds with a receptor that has a direct stimulatory effect on the muscle cell plasma membrane. The effect is excitatory, depolarizing the membrane of the postsynaptic muscle cell. A second type of acetylcholine receptor in heart muscle activates a signal-transduction pathway whose G proteins have two effects: They inhibit adenyl cyclase and open K+ channels in the muscle cell membrane, making it less able to generate an action potential. Both effects reduce the strength and rate of cardiac muscle cell contraction.

Biogenic Amines

The biogenic amines are neurotransmitters derived from amino acids. One group, known as catecholamines, consists of neurotransmitters produced from the amino acid tyrosine. This group includes epinephrine and norepinephrine, which also function as hormones (see Chapter 45), and a closely related compound called dopamine. Another biogenic amine, serotonin, is synthesized from the amino acid tryptophan. The biogenic amines often affect biochemical processes within the postsynaptic cell. In many cases they bind to specific receptors on the postsynaptic membrane, triggering signal-transduction pathways that affect the activities of specific enzymes in the postsynaptic cell.

The biogenic amines most commonly function as transmitters within the CNS. However, norepinephrine also functions in a branch of the peripheral nervous system called the autonomic nervous system, which we will examine shortly. Dopamine and serotonin are widespread in the brain and affect sleep, mood, attention, and learning. Imbalances of these neurotransmitters are associated with several disorders. For example, the degenerative illness Parkinson's disease is associated with a lack of dopamine in the brain, and an excess of dopamine is linked to schizophrenia. Some psychoactive drugs, including LSD and mescaline, apparently produce their hallucinatory effects by binding to serotonin and dopamine receptors in the brain.

Other Chemical Neurotransmitters

Four amino acids are known to function as CNS neurotransmitters: gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA), glycine, glutamate, and aspartate. GABA, believed to be the transmitter at most inhibitory synapses in the brain, produces IPSPs by increasing the chloride permeability of the postsynaptic membrane.

Several neuropeptides, relatively short chains of amino acids, serve as neurotransmitters. In common with the biogenic amines, neuropeptides often operate via signal-transduction pathways. A neuropeptide called substance P is a key excitatory signal that mediates our perception of pain. The endorphins are neuropeptides that function as natural analgesics, decreasing the perception of pain by the CNS. Neurochemists first discovered endorphins in the 1970s while studying the mechanism of opium addiction. Candace Pert and Solomon Snyder of Johns Hopkins University found specific receptors for the opiates morphine and heroin on neurons in the brain. It seemed odd that humans would have receptors keyed to chemicals from a plant (the opium poppy). Further research showed that, in fact, the drugs bind to these receptors in the brain by mimicking endorphins, the natural painkillers produced in the brain during times of physical or emotional stress, such as the labor of childbirth (see FIGURE 2.19). In addition to relieving pain, endorphins also decrease urine output (by affecting ADH secretion; see Chapter 45), depress respiration, produce euphoria, and have other emotional effects through specific pathways in the brain. An endorphin is also released from the anterior pituitary gland as a hormone that affects specific regions of the brain. Once again, we see the overlap between endocrine and nervous system control.

Gaseous Signals of the Nervous System

In common with many other types of cells, some neurons of the vertebrate PNS and CNS utilize gas molecules, notably nitric oxide (NO, see Chapter 45) and carbon monoxide (CO), as local regulators. For example, during sexual arousal of human males, certain neurons release NO gas into the erectile tissue of the penis. In response, smooth muscle cells in the blood vessel walls of the erectile tissue dilate and the spongy erectile tissue fills with blood, producing an erection. The male impotence drug, Viagra&#174;, increases the ability to achieve and maintain an erection during sexual arousal by inhibiting an enzyme that slows the muscle-relaxing effects of NO.

Many cells release gas molecules in response to chemical signals. For instance, the neurotransmitter acetylcholine released by neurons into the walls of blood vessels stimulates the endothelial cells of the vessels to synthesize and release NO. In turn, NO signals the neighboring smooth muscle cells to relax, dilating the vessels. The discovery of this mechanism in the late 1980s explained the medicinal action of nitroglycerin, which had been used for a century to treat angina (chest pain associated with reduced blood supply to the heart). Enzymes convert nitroglycerin to NO, which dilates the blood vessels that supply cardiac muscle.

Unlike typical neurotransmitters, NO and other gaseous messengers are not stored in cytoplasmic vesicles; cells synthesize them on demand. They diffuse into neighboring target cells, produce a change, and are broken down--all within a few seconds. In many of its targets, including smooth muscle cells, NO works like many hormones, stimulating a membrane-bound enzyme to synthesize a second messenger that directly affects cellular metabolism.

Now that we have discussed some key concepts about neurons, nerve signals, and neurotransmitters, we can consider how this cellular level of life contributes to the workings of the overall nervous system.




