
 Chloroplasts are the sites of photosynthesis in plants

All green parts of a plant, including green stems and unripened fruit, have chloroplasts, but the leaves are the major sites of photosynthesis in most plants (FIGURE 10.2). There are about half a million chloroplasts per square millimeter of leaf surface. The color of the leaf is from chlorophyll, the green pigment located within the chloroplasts. It is the light energy absorbed by chlorophyll that drives the synthesis of food molecules in the chloroplast. Chloroplasts are found mainly in the cells of the mesophyll, the tissue in the interior of the leaf. Carbon dioxide enters the leaf, and oxygen exits, by way of microscopic pores called stomata (singular, stoma; from the Greek, meaning "mouth"). Water absorbed by the roots is delivered to the leaves in veins. Leaves also use veins to export sugar to roots and other nonphotosynthetic parts of the plant.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 10-2. Focusing in on the location of photosynthesis in a plant. Leaves are the major organs of photosynthesis in plants. These pictures take you into a leaf, then into a cell, and finally into a chloroplast, the organelle where photosynthesis occurs. Gas exchange between the leaf's mesophyll tissue and the atmosphere occurs through microscopic pores called stomata. Chloroplasts, found mainly in the mesophyll, are bounded by two membranes that enclose the stroma, a dense fluid. Membranes of the thylakoid system separate the stroma from the thylakoid space. Thylakoids are concentrated in stacks called grana. (Middle right, LM; bottom right, TEM.)

A typical mesophyll cell has about 30 to 40 chloroplasts, each a watermelon-shaped organelle measuring about 2-4 mm by 4-7 mm. An envelope of two membranes encloses the stroma, the dense fluid within the chloroplast. An elaborate system of interconnected thylakoid membranes segregates the stroma from another compartment, the thylakoid space (or lumen). In some places, thylakoid sacs are stacked in columns called grana. Chlorophyll resides in the thylakoid membranes. (Photosynthetic prokaryotes lack chloroplasts; but as you will see in Chapter 27, they do have membranes that function in a manner similar to the thylakoid membranes of chloroplasts.) Now that we have looked at the sites of photosynthesis in plants, we are ready to see how these organelles convert the light energy absorbed by chlorophyll to chemical energy.




