
 Different cell types make different proteins, usually as a result of transcriptional regulation

As the tissues and organs of an embryo take shape, differentiation of their cells becomes apparent; the cells become obviously different in structure and function. Cellular differentiation is actually the outcome of a cell's developmental history extending back to the first mitotic divisions of the zygote. However, the earliest changes that set a cell on a path to specialization are subtle ones, showing up only at the molecular level. Before biologists knew much about the molecular changes occurring in embryos, they coined the termdeterminationto refer to the process that leads up to the observable differentiation of a cell. At the point in the process when the cell is irreversibly committed to its final fate, it is said to be "determined." Today we understand determination in terms of molecular changes. The outcome of determination--differentiation--is heralded by the expression of genes that encodetissue-specific proteins, which are found only in a certain type of cell and give the cell its characteristic structure and function. The first evidence of differentiation is the appearance of the mRNA for these proteins. Eventually, differentiation is observable with a microscope as changes in cellular structure. In most cases, the pattern of gene expression in a differentiated cell--what proteins the cell makes--is controlled at the level of transcription.

Differentiated cells are specialists at making tissue-specific proteins. These are the proteins that allow them to carry out their specialized roles in the organism. Developing lens cells in vertebrates, for example, synthesize large quantities of crystallins, proteins that aggregate to form transparent fibers that give the lens the ability to transmit and focus light. Because no other vertebrate cell type makes crystallins, these proteins are signposts of lens cell differentiation. Lens cells devote 80%  of their capacity for protein synthesis to making this one type of protein.

The differentiation of skeletal muscle cells is another instructive example. The "cells" of skeletal muscle, which we use for walking and lifting and other voluntary movements, are long fibers containing many nuclei within a single plasma membrane. They contain very high concentrations of proteins specific to muscle tissue, such as muscle-specific versions of the contractile proteins myosin and actin and membrane receptor proteins that detect signals from nerve cells. Muscle cells develop from embryonic precursor cells that have the potential to develop into a number of alternative cell types, including cartilage cells or fat cells, but particular conditions commit them to becoming muscle cells. Although the committed cells appear unchanged under the microscope, determination has occurred, and they are nowmyoblasts. Eventually, myoblasts start to churn out large amounts of muscle-specific proteins and fuse to form mature, elongated, multinucleated skeletal muscle cells (FIGURE 21.9).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 21-9. Determination and differentiation of muscle cells.This figure depicts a simplified version of how skeletal muscle cells arise from ordinary-looking embryonic cells that resemble fibroblasts (see the photo inFIGURE 12.15).
			  
		When this kind of embryonic precursor cell receives certain signals from other cells, a master control gene calledmyoDis activated, and the cell makes the MyoD protein. Although the appearance of the cell in the microscope does not change, determination has occurred: The activation ofmyoDcommits the cell, now called a myoblast, to becoming a skeletal muscle cell.
			  
		The MyoD protein is a transcription factor that activates genes encoding other muscle-specific transcription factors. MyoD also turns on genes such asp21that block the cell cycle and thus stop cell division. The various muscle-specific transcription factors activate the genes for muscle proteins such as myosin and actin. Meanwhile, the myoblasts fuse to become multinucleated mature muscle cells, also called muscle fibers.

What actually happens in muscle cell determination? Researchers have been able to answer this question by growing myoblasts in culture and applying some of the techniques you learned about in Chapter 20. To test the hypothesis that certain muscle-specific regulatory genes are active in myoblasts, researchers isolated mRNA from cultured myoblasts and used reverse transcriptase to prepare a library of genes in cDNA form (seeFIGURES 20.5and20.6)--intron-lacking versions of the genes expressed in myoblasts. In cloning the cDNA genes, the researchers positioned them next to a viral promoter that would turn on transcription in any kind of cell. The researchers then inserted each of the cloned genes into a separate embryonic precursor cell and looked for differentiation into myoblasts and muscle cells. In this way, they identified several crucial muscle determination genes, "master regulatory genes" that, when transcribed and translated, commit the cells to becoming skeletal muscle. Thus, in the case of muscle cells, the molecular basis of determination is the expression of one or more of these regulatory genes.

To understand more about how commitment occurs in muscle cell differentiation, let's focus on the master regulatory gene calledmyoD. Researchers learned that the protein product ofmyoD, called MyoD, is a transcription factor. It is a regulatory protein that binds to specific control elements in the DNA and stimulates the transcription of various genes, including some encoding still other muscle-specific transcription factors (see pp. 365-366). Presumably, all these target genes have enhancers recognized by MyoD and are thus coordinately controlled. Finally, the secondary transcription factors activate the muscle protein genes.

The MyoD protein is powerful. Researchers have been able to use it to change some kinds of fully differentiated nonmuscle cells, such as fat cells and liver cells, into muscle cells. Why doesn't it work onallkinds of cells? One likely explanation is that activation of the muscle-specific genes is not solely dependent on MyoD but requires a particularcombinationof regulatory proteins, some of which are lacking in cells that don't respond to MyoD. The determination and differentiation of other kinds of tissues may play out in a similar fashion.




