
 Phylum Nematoda: Roundworms are nonsegmented pseudocoelomates covered by tough cuticles

Among the most widespread of all animals, roundworms (nematodes) are found in most aquatic habitats, in wet soil, in the moist tissues of plants, and in the body fluids and tissues of animals. About 90,000 species are known, and perhaps ten times that number actually exist. In contrast to annelids, the bodies of nematodes are not segmented. The cylindrical bodies of roundworms range from less than 1 mm to more than a meter in length, tapering to a fine tip at the posterior end and to a more blunt tip at the anterior (head) end (FIGURE 33.25a, p. 662). A tough exoskeleton called a cuticle covers the body; as the worm grows, it periodically sheds its old cuticle (molting, or ecdysis) and secretes a new, larger one. Nematodes have a complete digestive tract. They lack a circulatory system, but nutrients are transported throughout the body via fluid in the pseudocoelom (a body cavity only partially lined by mesoderm--see FIGURE 32.6b). The muscles of nematodes are all longitudinal, and their contraction produces a thrashing motion.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-25. Nematodes. (a) Free-living nematode. This free-living nematode has the classic roundworm shape: cylindrical with tapered ends. You can see the mouth at the end that is more blunt. Not visible is the anus at the other end of a complete digestive tract. What looks like a corduroy coat is the worm's ridged cuticle (colorized SEM). (b) Parasitic nematode. These juveniles of Trichinella spiralis are encysted in human muscle tissue. This parasitic nematode causes trichinosis, characterized by severe nausea and sometimes death when large numbers of the juveniles penetrate heart muscle (LM).

Nematode reproduction is usually sexual. The sexes are separate in most species, females generally being larger than males. Fertilization is internal, and a female may deposit 100,000 or more fertilized eggs per day. The zygotes of most species are resistant cells capable of surviving harsh conditions.

Great numbers of nematodes live in moist soil and in decomposing organic matter on the bottoms of lakes and oceans. These extremely numerous free-living worms play an important role in decomposition and nutrient cycling, but little is known about most species. One species of soil nematode, Caenorhabitis elegans, is widely cultured and has become a model research organism in developmental biology (see Chapter 21).

Phylum Nematoda also includes many important agricultural pests that attack the roots of plants. Other species of roundworms parasitize animals. Humans host at least 50 nematode species, including various pinworms and hookworms. One notorious nematode is Trichinella spiralis, the worm that causes trichinosis (FIGURE 33.25b). Humans acquire this nematode by eating undercooked infected pork or other meat with juvenile worms encysted in the muscle tissue. Within the human intestine, the juveniles develop into sexually mature adults. Females burrow into the intestinal muscles and produce more juveniles, which bore through the body or travel in lymph vessels to encyst in other organs, including skeletal muscles.




