
 Root hairs, mycorrhizae, and a large surface area of cortical cells enhance water and mineral absorption

Much of the absorption of water and minerals occurs near root tips, where the epidermis is permeable to water and where root hairs are located. Root hairs, which are extensions of epidermal cells, account for much of the surface area of roots (see FIGURE 35.14). Soil particles, which are usually coated with water and dissolved minerals, adhere tightly to the hairs. The soil solution flows into the hydrophilic walls of epidermal cells and passes freely along the apoplast into the root cortex. This exposes all the parenchyma cells of the cortex to soil solution, providing a much greater surface area of membrane than the surface area of the epidermis alone.

As the soil solution moves along the apoplast into the roots, cells of the epidermis and cortex take up water and certain solutes into the symplast. The soil solution is usually very dilute, and roots can accumulate essential minerals to concentrations that are hundreds of times higher than the concentrations of these minerals in soil. For example, selective transport proteins of the plasma membrane and tonoplast enable root cells to extract K+, an essential mineral nutrient. In contrast, the cells exclude most Na+, which may be much more concentrated than K+ in the soil solution.

In their essential business of absorbing water and minerals from the soil, most plants are not on their own but have partners in the form of symbiotic fungi. "Infected" roots form mycorrhizae, symbiotic structures consisting of the plant's roots united with the hyphae (filaments) of the fungi (FIGURE 36.8). The hyphae absorb water and selected minerals, transferring much of these resources to the host plant. Chapter 37 highlights the role of mycorrhizae in the mineral nutrition of plants, and Chapter 31 featured the fungal partners in these mutualistic relationships. What is important to understand here is that the mycelium (network of hyphae) of the fungus endows mycorrhizae with an enormous surface area for absorption of water and minerals. As much as 3 m of hyphae can extend from each centimeter along the length of a root, reaching a far greater volume of soil than the root alone could penetrate. Mycorrhizae enable even older regions of roots, far from the abundance of root hairs near the root tips, to supply water and minerals to the plant.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 36-8. Mycorrhizae, symbiotic associations of fungi and roots. The white mycelium of the fungus ensheathes these roots of a red pine tree. The fungal hyphae provide an extensive surface area for the absorption of water and minerals.




