
 Learning is experience-based modification of behavior

Analyzing the genetic and environmental underpinnings of behavior can help scientists understand the extent to which behavior can vary among individuals of a species. In this section, we examine various forms of learning, which is the modification of behavior resulting from specific experiences. As we have said, even though an animal need not witness a developmentally fixed (innate) behavior to perform it, experience is still involved. Most innate behaviors improve with performance as animals learn to carry them out more efficiently. Conversely, it might seem that some things, such as the different human languages, are completely learned. It is true that the ability to speak a specific language, such as English or Spanish, has little or no genetic basis. However, the ability to learn a language is a function of a complex brain that develops in a particular environmental context under the guidance of a human genome.

The alarm calls of vervet monkeys (Cercopithecus aethiops) provide an example of how animals improve their performance of a behavior by means of learning. Dorothy Cheney and Richard Seyfarth, of the University of Pennsylvania, studied vervet monkeys in Amboseli National Park, Kenya. The vervets there give distinct alarm calls when they see leopards, eagles, or snakes. When a vervet sees a leopard, it gives a loud barking sound; when it sees an eagle, it gives a short double-syllabled cough; and the snake alarm call is a "chutter." Leopards, eagles, and snakes all eat vervet monkeys, which are about the size of domestic cats. Upon hearing a particular alarm call, the other members of the vervet group behave in an appropriate way: They run up a tree on hearing the alarm call for a leopard (vervets are nimbler than leopards in the trees); look up on hearing the alarm call for an eagle; and look down on hearing the alarm call for a snake (FIGURE 51.8).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 51-8. Vervet monkeys learn correct use of alarm calls. Vervet monkeys give different alarm calls on seeing different sources of danger. For example, on seeing a python, vervets give a distinct "snake" alarm call (inset), and the members of the group stand upright and look down. Vervets probably learn when to use appropriate calls from the behavior of other members of their group.

Infant vervet monkeys give alarm calls, but in a relatively undiscriminating way. For example, they give the "eagle" alarm call on seeing any bird, including harmless birds such as bee-eaters. With age, the monkeys improve their accuracy. In fact, adult vervet monkeys give the eagle alarm only on seeing an eagle belonging to either of the two species that eat vervets. The mechanism by which infants learn how to give the right call probably includes experiencing the behavior of other members of the group. For instance, if the infant gives the call on the right occasion--an eagle alarm when there is an eagle overhead, for example--another member of the group will also give the eagle call almost immediately. But if the infant gives the call when there is only a bee-eater flying by, the adults in the group are silent. The social confirmation of the infant's call probably helps it to learn when to give each call. Thus, vervet monkeys have an initial, unlearned tendency to give calls on seeing potentially threatening objects in the environment. Learning then fine-tunes the call such that adults only give calls in response to genuine dangers.

Learning Versus Maturation

Learning often affects innate (developmentally fixed) behavior, but changes in innate behaviors are not always due to learning. For instance, behavior may change because of ongoing developmental changes in neuromuscular systems, a process called maturation. We commonly speak of birds "learning" to fly, and you may have seen fledgling birds awkwardly fluttering about as if they were practicing. However, young birds have been experimentally reared in restrictive devices so that they could never flap their wings until an age when their normal kin were already flying. Such birds flew immediately and normally when released. Thus, the improvement must have resulted from neuromuscular maturation, not from learning.

In many cases, the distinction between learning and maturation is less obvious. When an adult herring gull brings food to its chick, the adult bends its head down and moves its beak, which has a red spot. The chick pecks the beak, stimulating the adult to regurgitate the food. Experiments have shown that the red spot swung horizontally at the end of a beak is the signal that elicits the chick's pecking. However, newly hatched chicks are indiscriminate and will peck at a wide variety of objects, whereas chicks a week or two old show their strongest response to accurate models of their parents' beaks. Would you predict that this change in the chick's behavior results from maturation or learning? Experiments involving herring gulls and laughing gulls show that maturation is not involved. A laughing gull chick that has been reared by a herring gull will respond more strongly to its foster parent's beak type than to the beak of its own species. The reverse is true for a herring gull chick cross-fostered by laughing gulls. This is an example of how learning can modify a behavior that is basically developmentally fixed.

Habituation

Habituation is a very simple type of learning that involves a loss of responsiveness to stimuli that convey little or no information. Examples are widespread. A hydra contracts when disturbed by a slight touch; it stops responding, however, if disturbed repeatedly by such a stimulus. Many mammals and birds recognize alarm calls of members of their species, but they eventually stop responding if these calls are not followed by an actual attack (the "cry-wolf" effect). In terms of ultimate causation, habituation may increase fitness by allowing an animal's nervous system to focus on stimuli that signal food, mates, or real danger instead of wasting time or energy on a vast number of other stimuli that are irrelevant to the animal's survival and reproduction.




