
 Respiration involves glycolysis, the Krebs cycle, and electron transport: an overview

Respiration is a cumulative function of three metabolic stages, diagrammed in FIGURE 9.6:



Click image to enlarge



Fig 9-6. An overview of cellular respiration. In a eukaryotic cell, glycolysis occurs outside the mitochondria in the cytosol. The Krebs cycle and the electron transport chains are located inside the mitochondria. During glycolysis, each glucose molecule is broken down into two molecules of the compound pyruvate. The pyruvate crosses the double membrane of the mitochondrion to enter the matrix, where the Krebs cycle decomposes it to carbon dioxide. NADH or FADH2 (see p. 164) transfers electrons from molecules undergoing glycolysis and the Krebs cycle to electron transport chains, which are built into the inner mitochondrial membrane. The electron transport chain converts the chemical energy to a form that can be used to drive oxidative phosphorylation, which accounts for most of the ATP generated by cellular respiration. A smaller amount of ATP is formed directly during glycolysis and the Krebs cycle by substrate-level phosphorylation.

Glycolysis (color-coded teal throughout the chapter)

The Krebs cycle (color-coded salmon)

The electron transport chain and oxidative phosphorylation (color-coded violet)

The first two stages, glycolysis and the Krebs cycle, are the catabolic pathways that decompose glucose and other organic fuels. Glycolysis, which occurs in the cytosol, begins the degradation by breaking glucose into two molecules of a compound called pyruvate. The Krebs cycle, which takes place within the mitochondrial matrix, completes the job by decomposing a derivative of pyruvate to carbon dioxide. Thus, the carbon dioxide produced by respiration represents fragments of oxidized organic molecules.

Some of the steps of glycolysis and the Krebs cycle are redox reactions in which dehydrogenase enzymes transfer electrons from substrates to NAD+, forming NADH. In the third stage of respiration, the electron transport chain accepts electrons from the breakdown products of the first two stages (usually via NADH) and passes these electrons from one molecule to another. At the end of the chain, the electrons are combined with hydrogen ions and molecular oxygen to form water (see FIGURE 9.5b). The energy released at each step of the chain is stored in a form the mitochondrion can use to make ATP. This mode of ATP synthesis is called oxidative phosphorylation because it is powered by the redox reactions that transfer electrons from food to oxygen.

The site of electron transport and oxidative phosphorylation is the inner membrane of the mitochondrion (see FIGURE 7.17). Oxidative phosphorylation accounts for almost 90%  of the ATP generated by respiration. A smaller amount of ATP is formed directly in a few reactions of glycolysis and the Krebs cycle by a mechanism called substrate-level phosphorylation (FIGURE 9.7). This mode of ATP synthesis occurs when an enzyme transfers a phosphate group from a substrate molecule to ADP. "Substrate molecule" here refers to an organic molecule generated during the catabolism of glucose.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 9-7. Substrate-level phosphorylation. Some ATP is made by direct enzymatic transfer of a phosphate group from a substrate to ADP. The phosphate donor in this case is phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), which is formed from the breakdown of sugar during glycolysis.

Respiration cashes in the large denomination of energy banked in glucose for the small change of ATP, which is more practical for the cell to spend on its work. For each molecule of glucose degraded to carbon dioxide and water by respiration, the cell makes up to about 38 molecules of ATP.

This overview has introduced how glycolysis, the Krebs cycle, and electron transport fit into the overall process of cellular respiration. We are now ready to take a closer look at each of these three stages of respiration.*




