
 Phylum Echinodermata: Echinoderms have a water vascular system and secondary radial anatomy

Sea stars and most other echinoderms (from the Greek echin, spiny, and derma, skin) are sessile or slow-moving animals. The internal and external parts of the animal radiate from the center, often as five spokes. A thin skin covers an endoskeleton of hard calcareous plates. Most echinoderms are prickly from skeletal bumps and spines that have various functions. Unique to echinoderms is the water vascular system, a network of hydraulic canals branching into extensions called tube feet that function in locomotion, feeding, and gas exchange.

Sexual reproduction of echinoderms usually involves separate male and female individuals that release their gametes into the seawater. The radial adults develop by metamorphosis from bilateral larvae.

Given our division of eumetazoans into Radiata and Bilateria, we should explain the radial appearance of most echinoderms. The echinoderms are definitely bilaterians, not radiate animals related to cnidarians. Echinoderm larvae have bilateral symmetry. The radial anatomy of adult echinoderms is a secondary adaptation to a sessile lifestyle. And even echinoderm adults are not truly radial in their anatomy. For example, the opening (madreporite) of a sea star's water vascular system is not central, but to one side of the "star" (see FIGURE 33.38).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-38. Anatomy of a sea star. The surface of a sea star is covered by spines that help defend against predators and by small gills for gas exchange. Internal organs are suspended by mesenteries in a well-developed coelom. A short digestive tract runs from the mouth on the bottom of the central disk to the anus on the top of the disk. Digestive glands secrete digestive juices and aid in the absorption and storage of nutrients. The central disk has a nerve ring and nerve cords radiating from the ring into the arms. The water vascular system consists of a ring canal in the central disk and five radial canals, each running the length of an arm in a groove. The system connects to the outside by way of the sievelike madreporite. Branching from each radial canal are hundreds of hollow, muscular tube feet filled with fluid continuous with the rest of the water vascular system. Each tube foot consists of a bulblike ampulla and suckered podium (foot portion). The podium expands and extends to contact the substratum when the ampulla squeezes water into it. The podium shortens and bends when muscles in its wall contract, forcing water back into the ampulla.

The 7,000 or so echinoderms, all marine, are divided into six classes (FIGURE 33.37): Asteroidea (sea stars), Ophiuroidea (brittle stars), Echinoidea (sea urchins and sand dollars), Crinoidea (sea lilies and feather stars), Holothuroidea (sea cucumbers), and Concentricycloidea (sea daisies). The sea daisies, discovered only recently, live on waterlogged wood in the deep sea.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-37. Echinoderms

Class Asteroidea

Sea stars have five arms (sometimes more) radiating from a central disk (FIGURE 33.37a). The undersurfaces of the arms bear tube feet, each of which can act like a suction disk. By a complex set of hydraulic and muscle actions, the suction can be created or released (FIGURE 33.38). The sea star coordinates its tube feet to adhere firmly to rocks or to creep along slowly as the tube feet extend, grip, contract, release, extend, and grip again. Sea stars also use their tube feet to grasp prey, such as clams and oysters (FIGURE 33.37b). The arms of the sea star embrace the closed bivalve, hanging on tightly by the tube feet. The sea star then turns its stomach inside-out, everting it through its mouth and into the narrow opening between the shells of the bivalve. The digestive system of the sea star secretes juices that begin digesting the soft body of the mollusk within its own shell.

Sea stars and some other echinoderms are capable of regeneration. Sea stars can regrow lost arms, and members of one genus can even regrow an entire body from a single arm.

Class Ophiuroidea

Brittle stars have distinct central disks, and the arms are long and flexible (FIGURE 33.37c). Their tube feet lack suckers, and they move by serpentine lashing of the arms. Some species are suspension-feeders; others are predators or scavengers.

Class Echinoidea

Sea urchins and sand dollars have no arms, but they do have five rows of tube feet that function in slow movement (FIGURE 33.37d). Sea urchins also have muscles that pivot their long spines, which aids in moving. The mouth of an urchin is ringed by complex jawlike structures adapted for eating seaweeds and other food. Sea urchins are roughly spherical in shape, whereas sand dollars are flattened and disk-shaped.

Class Crinoidea

Sea lilies live attached to the substratum by stalks; feather stars crawl about by using their long, flexible arms. As a group, crinoids use their arms in suspension-feeding (FIGURE 33.37e). The arms circle the mouth, which is directed upward, away from the substratum. Crinoidea is an ancient class whose evolution has been very conservative; fossilized sea lilies some 500 million years old could pass for modern members of the class.

Class Holothuroidea

On casual inspection, sea cucumbers do not look much like other echinoderms (FIGURE 33.37f). They lack spines, and the hard endoskeleton is much reduced. Sea cucumbers are elongated in the oral-aboral axis, giving them the shape for which they are named and further disguising their relationship to sea stars and sea urchins. Closer examination, however, reveals five rows of tube feet, part of the water vascular system found only in echinoderms. Some of the tube feet around the mouth are developed as feeding tentacles.




