
 Symbiotic nitrogen fixation results from intricate interactions between roots and bacteria

Many plant families include species that form symbiotic relationships with nitrogen-fixing bacteria that give roots a built-in source of fixed nitrogen for assimilation into organic compounds. Most of the research on symbiotic nitrogen fixation has focused on agriculturally important members of the legume family, including peas, beans, soybeans, peanuts, alfalfa, and clover. A legume's roots have swellings called nodules composed of plant cells that contain nitrogen-fixing bacteria of the genus Rhizobium ("root living"). Inside the nodule, Rhizobium bacteria assume a form called bacteroids, which are contained within vesicles formed by the root cell (FIGURE 37.10). Each legume is associated with a particular species of Rhizobium. FIGURE 37.11 describes the steps in the development of root nodules after bacteria enter through what is called an infection thread.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 37-10. Root nodules on legumes. (a) Pea plant root. The bumps on this pea plant root are nodules containing symbiotic bacteria. The bacteria fix nitrogen and obtain photosynthetic products supplied by the plant. (b) Bacteroids in a soybean root nodule. In this TEM, a cell from a root nodule of soybean is filled with bacteroids in vesicles. The cell on the left is uninfected.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 37-11. Development of a soybean root nodule.

The symbiotic relationship between a legume and nitrogen-fixing bacteria is mutualistic, with both partners benefiting. The bacteria supply the legume with fixed nitrogen, and the plant provides the bacteria with carbohydrates and other organic compounds. Most of the ammonium produced by symbiotic nitrogen fixation is used by the nodules to make amino acids, which are then transported to the shoot and leaves via the xylem.

Some root nodules have a reddish color owing to a molecule called leghemoglobin. Leghemoglobin is an iron-containing protein that, like the hemoglobin of human red blood cells, binds reversibly to oxygen (leg- is for legume). The root nodule's leghemoglobin acts as an oxygen "buffer," regulating the supply of oxygen for the intense respiration required by the bacteria to produce ATP for nitrogen fixation.

Symbiotic Nitrogen Fixation and Agriculture

Now that you have learned about symbiotic nitrogen fixation, you can understand the agricultural practice of crop rotation. One year a nonlegume such as corn is planted, and the following year alfalfa or some other legume is planted to restore the concentration of fixed nitrogen in the soil. Instead of being harvested, the legume crop is often plowed under so that it will decompose as "green manure" (FIGURE 37.12). To ensure that the legume encounters its specific Rhizobium, the seeds are soaked in a culture of the bacteria or dusted with bacterial spores before sowing.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 37-12. Crop rotation and "green manure." The "green manure" being mulched into the soil of this Washington State farm is sweet clover, a legume with root nodules containing nitrogen-fixing bacteria. Every third year, clover is planted and the crop is plowed under. This improves the physical structure and nitrogen content of the soil for growing wheat and other crops during the other two years of the crop rotation cycle. Crop rotation, especially when the legume is mulched instead of harvested, reduces the need for manufactured fertilizers.

Many plant families besides legumes include species that benefit from symbiotic nitrogen fixation. For example, alders and certain tropical grasses host nitrogen-fixing bacteria of the actinomycete group (see Chapter 27). Rice, a crop of great commercial importance, benefits indirectly from symbiotic nitrogen fixation. Rice farmers culture a water fern called Azolla in their paddies. The fern has symbiotic cyanobacteria that fix nitrogen and increase the fertility of the rice paddy. The growing rice eventually shades and kills the Azolla, and decomposition of this organic material adds more nitrogenous minerals to the paddy.

The Molecular Biology of Root Nodule Formation in Legumes

How does a legume species recognize a certain species of Rhizobium among the many bacterial species inhabiting a root's soil environment? And how does an encounter with that specific Rhizobium lead to the development of a nodule? These two questions have led researchers to a chemical dialogue between the bacteria and the root, with each partner responding to the chemical signals from the other by expressing certain genes whose products contribute to nodule formation (FIGURE 37.13). The plant initiates the communication when its roots secrete molecules called flavonoids, which enter Rhizobium cells living in the vicinity of the roots. The specificity of this signal arises from variations in flavonoid structure, with a particular legume species secreting a type of flavonoid that only a certain Rhizobium species will detect and absorb. The plant's signal triggers the production of an answering molecule by the bacterium. Specifically, the plant's signal molecule activates a gene-regulating protein, which switches on a cluster of bacterial genes called nod, for "nodulation" genes. The products of these genes are enzymes that catalyze production of species-specific molecules called Nod factors. Secreted by the bacterial cells, the Nod factors return the "hello" and signal the root to form the infection thread the Rhizobium will enter and to begin forming the root nodule (see FIGURE 37.11). The plant's responses require activation of genes called early nodulin genes, probably by gene-regulating signal-transduction pathways, such as those you learned about in Chapter 11.

Researchers have analyzed the molecular structure of the Nod factors for clues to these bacterial molecules' ability to influence genes within the cells of a plant. An early discovery, puzzling at the time, was that Nod factors are very similar to chitins, the main substances in the cell walls of fungi and the exoskeletons of arthropods (see Chapter 5). But now there is evidence that plants themselves produce chitinlike substances that probably function as growth regulators. This discovery led to the hypothesis that Nod factors mimic certain plant growth regulators in stimulating the roots to grow new organs--nodules, in this case. Researchers have also learned that the plant genes that must be expressed for nodules to form are genes that also function in many other developmental processes in plants. This suggests that researchers might someday learn to induce Rhizobium uptake and nodule formation in crop plants that do not normally form such nitrogen-fixing symbiotic relationships. A more likely outcome of continued research, however, is that scientists will learn to manipulate the molecular biology of the root-Rhizobium relationships of legumes and other natural nodule formers to improve the efficiency of nitrogen fixation and protein production by crops.




