
 Mitochondria and plastids evolved from endosymbiotic bacteria

The hypothesis we just referred to for the origin of the endomembrane system of eukaryotic cells fits the traditional Darwinian concept of gradual refinement of existing structures through natural selection. It seems like a reasonable guess that eukaryotes evolved from a single prokaryotic ancestor that gradually accumulated greater structural complexity. But the evidence is now overwhelming that the eukaryotic cell originated from a symbiotic coalition of multiple prokaryotic ancestors, not just one. We'll examine how this merger of organisms gave rise to two key eukaryotic organelles: mitochondria and plastids (the general term for the class of eukaryotic organelles that includes chloroplasts, as well as other types of plastids, both photosynthetic and nonphotosynthetic).

An idea originated by the early 20th century Russian biologist C. Mereschkovsky and developed extensively by Lynn Margulis, of the University of Massachusetts, the theory of serial endosymbiosis proposes that mitochondria and chloroplasts were formerly small prokaryotes living within larger cells. The term endosymbiont is used for the cell that lives within another cell, called the host cell. The proposed ancestors of mitochondria were aerobic heterotrophic prokaryotes that became endosymbionts. The proposed ancestors of chloroplasts were photosynthetic prokaryotes that became endosymbionts.

The prokaryotic ancestors of mitochondria and chloroplasts probably gained entry to the host cell as undigested prey or internal parasites (see FIGURE 28.4). Such a mechanism suggests an earlier evolution of an endomembrane system and a cytoskeleton that made it possible for the larger cell to engulf the smaller prokaryotes and package them within vesicles. By whatever means the relationships began, it is not hard to imagine the symbiosis eventually becoming mutually beneficial. A heterotrophic host could use nutrients released from photosynthetic endosymbionts. And in a world that was becoming increasingly aerobic, a cell that was itself an anaerobe would have benefited from aerobic endosymbionts that turned the oxygen to advantage. In the process of becoming more interdependent, the host and endosymbionts would have become a single organism, its parts inseparable. All eukaryotes, whether heterotrophic or autotrophic, have mitochondria or genetic remnants of these organelles. However, not all eukaryotes have chloroplasts. Thus, the hypothesis of serial endosymbiosis (a sequence of endosymbiotic events) supposes that mitochondria evolved before chloroplasts.

The evidence supporting an endosymbiotic origin of chloroplasts and mitochondria includes the existence of endosymbiotic relationships in the modern world. Another line of evidence is the similarity between bacteria and the chloroplasts and mitochondria of eukaryotes. Both chloroplasts and mitochondria are the appropriate size to be descendants of bacteria. The inner membranes of chloroplasts and mitochondria, derived from the membranes of endosymbiotic prokaryotes, according to the endosymbiotic theory, do indeed have several enzymes and transport systems that resemble those found on the plasma membranes of modern prokaryotes. Mitochondria and chloroplasts replicate by a splitting process reminiscent of binary fission in bacteria. Each chloroplast and mitochondrian contains a genome consisting of a single circular DNA molecule not associated with histones or other proteins, as in most prokaryotes. The organelles contain the transfer RNAs, ribosomes, and other equipment needed to transcribe and translate their DNA into proteins. In terms of size, biochemical characteristics, and sensitivity to certain antibiotics, the ribosomes of chloroplasts are more similar to prokaryotic ribosomes than they are to the ribosomes outside the chloroplast in the cytosol of the eukaryotic cell. Mitochondrial ribosomes vary extensively from one group of eukaryotes to another, but they are generally more similar to prokaryotic ribosomes than to their counterparts in the eukaryotic cytoplasm.

A comprehensive theory for the origin of the eukaryotic cell must also account for the evolution of the cytoskeleton, including the 9 + 2 microtubule apparatus of eukaryotic flagella and cilia (see Chapter 7). Some researchers have speculated that eukaryotic flagella and cilia evolved from symbiotic bacteria (see discussion of spirochetes in TABLE 27.3), but the evidence for this is not strong.

Related to the evolution of the eukaryotic flagellum is the origin of mitosis and meiosis, processes unique to eukaryotes that also employ microtubules. Mitosis made it possible to reproduce the large genomes of the eukaryotic nucleus, and the closely related mechanics of meiosis became an essential process in eukaryotic sex. The question of cytoskeleton origin clearly demonstrates how much more researchers have to learn about the genesis of eukaryotic life.




