
 The punctuated equilibrium model has stimulated research on thetempo of speciation

Traditional evolutionary trees that diagram the descent of species from ancestral forms sprout branches that diverge gradually, with species evolving continuously over long spans of time (FIGURE 24.17a, p. 476). Such trees are based on the idea that big changes occur by the accumulation of many small ones. This concept extends the processes of microevolution to the divergence of species. However, paleontologists rarely find gradual transitions of fossil forms. Instead, they often observe species appearing as new forms rather suddenly (in geologic terms) in a layer of rocks, persisting essentially unchanged for their tenure on Earth, and then disappearing from the fossil record as suddenly as they appeared. Darwin was bewildered by the dearth of connecting fossils and wrote: "Although each species must have passed through numerous transitional stages, it is probable that the periods during which each underwent modification, though many and long as measured by years, have been short in comparison with the periods during which each remained in an unchanged condition."



Click image to enlarge



Fig 24-17. Two models for the tempo of speciation.

We can account for the "sudden" appearances of new forms in the fossil record partly by applying the allopatric model of speciation. In allopatric speciation, a new species arises as a splinter population in a separate place from where the ancestral species lives. If the new species later extends its range into that of the ancestral species, what we see in the fossil record is the geologically sudden appearance of a new species in a locale where there are also fossils of the ancestral species, though maybe in different strata. By then, the ancestor may have been extinct (or competition from the new species could contribute to extinction). Alternatively, the new species could coexist in the same range as the ancestor. Either way, the new species does not appear in the fossil record at the site of its ancestor until it has diverged in form during its period of geographic separation.

Advocates of a model called punctuated equilibrium incorporate ideas about the tempo of speciation in their explanations of what we see in the fossil record. According to this model, species diverge in spurts of relatively rapid change, instead of slowly and gradually (FIGURE 24.17b). In other words, species undergo most of their morphological modification as they first bud from parent species and then change little, even as they give rise to additional species. The term punctuated equilibrium is derived from the idea of long periods of stasis (equilibrium) punctuated by episodes of speciation.

How can speciation in a few thousand generations, which may require several thousand years, be called an abrupt episode? The fossil record indicates that successful species last for a few million years, on average. Suppose that a particular species survives for 5 million years, but most of its morphological changes occurred during the first 50,000 years of its existence. In this case, the evolution of the species-defining characteristics was compressed into just 1%  of the lifetime of the species. On the time scale that can generally be determined in fossil strata, the species will appear suddenly in rocks of a certain age and then linger with little or no change before becoming extinct. During its formative millennia, the species may have accumulated its modifications gradually, but relative to the overall history of the species, its inception was abrupt.

Once it is acknowledged that "sudden" may be many thousands of years on the vast scale of geologic time, the debate over the rate of speciation is muted somewhat. The degree to which a species changes after its origin is another issue. If the species is adapted to an environment that stays the same, then natural selection would counter changes in the gene pool. In this view, stabilizing selection tends to hold a population in a long period of stasis (see Chapter 23).

Some gradualists retort that stasis is an illusion. Many species may continue to change after they come into existence, but in ways that cannot be detected from fossils. By necessity, paleontologists base their theories of descent almost entirely on external anatomy and skeletons. Changes in internal anatomy and physiology may go unnoticed, as would modifications in behavior.




