
 Ecological succession is the sequence of community changes after a disturbance

Changes in community composition and structure are most apparent after some disturbance, such as a large fire or a volcanic eruption, strips away the existing vegetation. The disturbed area may be colonized by a variety of species, which are gradually replaced by a succession of other species. Such transitions in species composition over ecological time represent a process called ecological succession. The process is called primary succession if it begins in a virtually lifeless area where soil has not yet formed, such as on a new volcanic island or on the rubble (moraine) left behind by a retreating glacier. Often the only life-forms initially present are autotrophic bacteria. Lichens and mosses, which grow from windblown spores, are commonly the first macroscopic photosynthesizers to colonize such areas. Soil develops gradually, as rocks weather and organic matter accumulates from the decomposed remains of the early colonizers. Once soil is present, the lichens and mosses are usually overgrown by other plants, such as grasses, shrubs, and trees that sprout from seeds blown in from nearby areas or carried in by animals. Eventually, an area may be colonized by plants that become the community's prevalent form of vegetation. For primary succession to produce such a community may take hundreds or thousands of years.

Secondary succession occurs where an existing community has been cleared by some disturbance that leaves the soil intact. Succession in Yellowstone following the 1988 fires is an example (see FIGURE 53.18). Often the area begins to return to something like its original state. For instance, forested areas that are cleared for farming will, if abandoned, undergo secondary succession and may eventually return to forest. The earliest plants to recolonize such an area are often herbaceous species that grow from windblown or animal-borne seeds. If the area is not burned or heavily grazed, woody shrubs may in time replace most of the herbaceous species, and forest trees may eventually replace most of the shrubs.

Three key processes may be involved in succession between the early arrivals and the later arriving species. The early arrivals may facilitate, or contribute to, the appearance of the later species by making the environment more favorable for the later species. For example, they might make the soil more fertile. Alternatively, the early species may inhibit establishment of the later species, so that the later species colonize successfully in spite of, rather than because of, the activities of the early species. Finally, the early species may be completely independent of the later species, so that they tolerate the later species but do not help or hinder colonization by the later arrivals. Let's look at how these various processes contribute to primary succession in one specific example.

During the past 300 years, there has been a gradual retreat of glaciers in the Northern Hemisphere. As the glaciers retreat, they leave moraines. Researchers can determine the age of these postglaciation areas of moraine from the age of the new trees growing on the moraine or, in the last 80 years, by direct observation. Ecologists have conducted the most extensive research on moraine succession at Glacier Bay, in southeastern Alaska. Since about 1760, the glaciers there have retreated about 98 km, an extraordinary retreat rate of almost 400 m per year (FIGURE 53.19). Rocky moraines form a nearly pristine but harsh environment for plants to colonize.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 53-19. A glacial retreat in southeastern Alaska. The dated locations chronicle recession of the glacier since 1760. The broken lines show the approximate edge of the ice in 1760 and 1860, based on historical descriptions. As the ice retreats, it leaves moraines along the edge of the bay (left inset). Primary succession occurs on the moraines (right inset).

TABLE 53.2 summarizes the pattern of succession on the moraines in Glacier Bay. The exposed moraine is colonized first by pioneering plant species--mosses, fireweed, Dryas (a herbaceous angiosperm), willows, and cottonwood. In a few decades, the area is invaded by alder (Alnus), which eventually forms dense, pure thickets up to 9 m tall. These alder stands are later invaded by Sitka spruce, which, after another century, forms a dense forest. Western hemlock and mountain hemlock invade the spruce stands, and after another century, the community is a spruce-hemlock forest. This forest, however, will endure on well-drained slopes only. In areas of poor drainage, the forest floor of this spruce-hemlock forest is invaded by sphagnum mosses, which hold large amounts of water and acidify the soil. With the spread of conditions associated with sphagnum, the trees die because the soil is waterlogged and too oxygen-deficient to sustain the trees' roots, and the area becomes a sphagnum bog. Thus, by about 300 years after glacial retreat, the vegetation consists of sphagnum bogs on the poorly drained flat areas and spruce-hemlock forest on the well-drained slopes.

Table 53-2. The Pattern of Succession on Moraines in Glacier Bay

Years after DeglaciationDominant PlantOther Common Species0-30DryasFireweed, willows, mosses, cottonwoods30-80AlderWillows80-200Sitka spruceAlder, willows200-300Sitka spruce, western hemlockMountain hemlock&gt; 300Sphagnum moss (in flat areas)Bog plantsHow is succession on glacial moraines related to the environmental impact of the changing vegetation? The bare soil exposed as the glacier retreats is quite basic, with a pH of 8.0-8.4 because of the carbonates contained in the parent rocks. The soil pH falls rapidly with the arrival of vegetation, and the rate of change depends on the vegetation type. The most striking change is caused by alder, which reduces the pH from 8.0 to 5.0 in 30 to 50 years. The leaves of alder are slightly acidic, and as they decompose, they become even more acidic. As the spruce begins to take over from the alder, the pH stabilizes at about 5.0, and it does not change for the next 150 years.

The soil concentrations of mineral nutrients also show marked changes with time. FIGURE 53.20, for example, shows the changes in soil nitrogen levels. One of the characteristic features of the bare soil after glacial retreat is its low nitrogen content. Almost all the pioneer species begin the succession with very poor growth and yellow leaves due to inadequate nitrogen supply. The exceptions to this are Dryas and, particularly, alder; these species have symbiotic bacteria that fix atmospheric nitrogen (see Chapter 37). Soil nitrogen increases rapidly during the alder stage of succession. The spruce forest develops by spending the capital of soil nitrogen accumulated by the alder. But because spruce trees do not have nitrogen-fixing symbionts, the concentration of soil nitrogen declines again.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 53-20. Change in soil nitrogen concentration during succession after glacial retreat in Glacier Bay, Alaska. Plant succession is shown along the top.

Both inhibition and facilitation factor into primary succession on glacial moraines. One way to test experimentally for these processes is to sow seeds of the later successional species into the earlier stages of succession. When seeds of alder and Sitka spruce were sown into the early successional stages at Glacier Bay, they were inhibited in their germination, and the survival of seedlings that did geminate was reduced. Inhibition seems to be the dominant process in the early successional stages. But once alder and Dryas have enriched the soil with nitrogen, Sitka spruce uses this nitrogen for growth, so it is facilitated by the pioneer species. The pioneer plants alter the soil properties, which in turn permit new species to grow, and these species in turn alter the environment in different ways, contributing to succession.




