
 Biodiversity at all three levels is vital to human welfare

Why should we care about the loss of biodiversity? Perhaps the purest reason is what E. O. Wilson calls biophilia, our sense of connection to nature and other forms of life. The concept that other species are important and should be protected is a pervasive theme of many religions and the basis of the moral argument that we should protect biodiversity. There is also a concern for future human generations. Do we have the right to deprive them of Earth's species richness? Paraphrasing an old Chinese proverb, G. H. Brundtland, former prime minister of Norway, put it this way: "We must consider our planet to be on loan from our children, rather than being a gift from our ancestors."

Benefits of Species Diversity and Genetic Diversity

In addition to the aesthetic and ethical reasons for preserving biodiversity, there are practical reasons as well. Biodiversity is a crucial natural resource, and species that are threatened could provide crops, fibers, and medicines for human use. In the United States, 25%  of all prescriptions dispensed from pharmacies contain substances derived from plants. For example, in the 1970s, researchers discovered that the rosy periwinkle from Madagascar contains alkaloids that inhibit cancer cell growth (FIGURE 55.3). The result of this discovery is remission for most victims of two potentially deadly forms of cancer, Hodgkin's disease and a childhood leukemia. There are five other species of periwinkles on Madagascar, and one is approaching extinction.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 55-3. The rosy periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus): a plant that saves lives. Before alkaloids that inhibit cancer cell growth were discovered in the rosy periwinkle over 20 years ago, Hodgkin's disease and acute lymphocytic leukemia were two of the deadliest cancers. Now most victims are cured. This plant is one of hundreds used to treat human diseases.

The loss of species also means the loss of genes. Each species has certain unique genes, and biodiversity represents the sum of all the genomes of all organisms on Earth. Because many millions of species may become extinct before we even know about them, we stand to lose irretrievably the valuable genetic potential held in their unique libraries of genes.

Recently, U.S. National Park Service officials have been negotiating with private industry to sell samples of extremophilic prokaryotes from the numerous hot springs in Yellowstone National Park. The corporations anticipate using DNA extracted from the prokaryotes to mass-produce commercially useful enzymes. Consider the historical example of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), the gene-cloning technology based on an enzyme extracted from thermophilic prokaryotes from hot springs (see FIGURE 20.7). Many researchers and industry officials are enthusiastic about the potential that such "bioprospecting" holds for the future development of new medicines, foods, petroleum substitutes, industrial chemicals, and other important products.

Ecosystem Services

The benefits that individual species provide to humans are often substantial, but saving individual species is only part of the rationale for saving ecosystems. Humans evolved in Earth's ecosystems, and our bodies are finely adjusted to these systems. While it is possible to survive in a world with considerably less biodiversity, it is important to realize that humans are dependent on ecosystems and on interactions with other species. By allowing the extinction of species and the degradation of habitats to continue, we risk our own species' survival.

In the urban and suburban settings in which most of us live today, it is easy to lose sight of the vital ecosystem services on which we depend. Ecosystem services encompass all the processes through which natural ecosystems and the species they contain help sustain human life on Earth. Here are just a few of these ecosystem services:

Purification of air and water

Reduction of the severity of droughts and floods

Generation and preservation of fertile soils

Detoxification and decomposition of wastes

Pollination of crops and natural vegetation

Dispersal of seeds

Nutrient cycling

Control of many agricultural pests by natural enemies

Protection of coastal shores from erosion

Protection from ultraviolet rays

Moderation of weather extremes

Provision of aesthetic beauty

Human life would cease without these ecosystem services; and yet we generally undervalue them, perhaps because we don't attach a monetary value to them.

In a 1997 article, ecologist Robert Costanza and colleagues attempted to put a dollar figure on ecosystem services. Their bottom-line estimate was $33 trillion per year, nearly twice as much as the gross national product of all the countries of the globe ($18 trillion). It is, of course, difficult to speculate about the dollar value of ecosystem services. Perhaps it is more realistic to do the accounting on a small scale. What, for example, is the true price of building a dam or clear-cutting a patch of forest if we include the dollar loss of ecosystem services in the cost column?

One large-scale experiment illustrates how little we understand about ecosystem services. Biosphere II, in Oracle, Arizona, was an attempt to create a closed ecosystem covering 1.27 ha (3.1 acres). Benefactors curious about the outcome invested over $200 million to build the giant airtight terrarium (FIGURE 55.4). Biosphere II had a forest with soil, a miniature ocean, and several other "ecosystems." In 1991, with much fanfare, eight people entered Biosphere II for what was supposed to be two years of isolated habitation. But the artificial biosphere failed, and the experiment had to be stopped after 15 months. Oxygen concentration dropped to 65%  of Earth's atmospheric O2 concentration, and CO2 concentration fluctuated wildly. Most of the vertebrate species became extinct in Biosphere II, and all of the pollinators died. There were population explosions of cockroaches and other pests. But in a sense, the experiment was not a failure, for it taught us that no one yet knows how to engineer a system that can provide humans with all the life-support services that natural ecosystems produce for free.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 55-4. What scientists learned about ecosystem services from the world's largest terrarium. Biosphere II, in Arizona, covers an area the size of two football fields. The eight biospherians who entered the container in 1991 all had to abandon Biosphere II within 15 months. An investment of over $200 million was not enough to create a system that provides all the ecosystem services required to sustain human life. In fact, a greater appreciation for the pricelessness and complexity of ecosystem services and the biodiversity that provides them was perhaps the most important lesson from Biosphere II.




