
 The divisions of the peripheral nervous system interact in maintaining homeostasis

Structurally, the vertebrate PNS consists of paired cranial and spinal nerves and associated ganglia (see FIGURE 48.16). The cranial nerves originate in the brain and innervate organs of the head and upper body. The spinal nerves originate in the spinal cord and innervate the entire body. Mammals have 12 pairs of cranial nerves and 31 pairs of spinal nerves. Most of the cranial nerves and all of the spinal nerves contain both sensory and motor neurons; a few of the cranial nerves are sensory only (the olfactory and optic nerves, for example).

Because most nerves contain a diversity of neurons that play different roles, it is convenient to divide the PNS into a hierarchy of components that differ in function (FIGURE 48.17). The sensory division of the PNS is made up of the sensory, or afferent (incoming), neurons that convey information to the CNS from sensory receptors that monitor the external and internal environment. The motor division is composed of the motor, or efferent (outgoing), neurons that convey signals from the CNS to effector cells. The motor division is divided, in turn, into two functional divisions, called the somatic and autonomic nervous systems.

The somatic nervous system carries signals to skeletal muscles, mainly in response to external stimuli. The somatic nervous system is often considered voluntary because it is subject to conscious control, but a substantial proportion of skeletal muscle movement is actually determined by reflexes mediated by the spinal cord or lower brain.

The autonomic nervous system conveys signals that regulate the internal environment by controlling smooth and cardiac muscles and the organs of the gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, excretory, and endocrine systems. This control is generally involuntary.

The autonomic nervous system consists of two divisions that act on our body organs with opposing effects (FIGURE 48.18). Activation of the sympathetic division correlates with arousal and energy generation: the heart beats faster, the liver converts glycogen to glucose, bronchi of the lungs dilate and support increased gas exchange, digestion is inhibited, and secretion of adrenaline from the adrenal medulla is stimulated. Activity of the parasympathetic division causes approximately the mirror image of this: a calming and a return to emphasis on self-maintenance functions. For example, activity of parasympathetic nerves decreases heart rate and energy storage and also enhances digestion. When sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves innervate the same organ, they often (but not always) have antagonistic (opposite) effects.

The somatic and autonomic nervous systems often cooperate in maintaining homeostasis. In response to a drop in temperature, for example, the hypothalamus of the brain signals the autonomic nervous system to constrict surface blood vessels, which reduces heat loss; at the same time the hypothalamus signals the somatic nervous system and causes shivering.




