
 A population's gene pool is defined by its allele frequencies

A population is a localized group of individuals belonging to the same species. For now, we will define a species as a group of populations whose individuals have the potential to interbreed and produce fertile offspring in nature (this definition will be examined more critically in Chapter 24). Each species is distributed over a certain geographic range, but within this range individuals are usually concentrated in several localized populations. A population may be isolated from other populations of the same species, exchanging genetic material only rarely. Such isolation is particularly common for populations confined to widely separated islands, unconnected lakes, or mountain ranges separated by lowlands. However, populations are not always isolated, nor do they necessarily have sharp boundaries. One dense population center may blur into another in an intermediate region where members of the species occur but are less numerous. Although these populations are not isolated, individuals are still concentrated in centers and are more likely to breed with members of the same population than with members of other populations. Therefore, individuals near a population center are, on average, more closely related to one another than to members of other populations (FIGURE 23.2).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 23-2. Population distribution. (a) Separated by a river bottom, where firs are uncommon, the two Douglas fir populations are not totally isolated. Interbreeding occurs when wind blows pollen between the populations. Nonetheless, trees are more likely to breed with members of the same population than with trees on the other side of the river. (b) This nighttime satellite view of the eastern United States shows the lights of human population centers. People move around the country, of course, but people are more likely to choose mates locally.

The total aggregate of genes in a population at any one time is called the population's gene pool. It consists of all alleles at all gene loci in all individuals of the population. For a diploid species, each locus is represented twice in the genome of an individual, who may be either homozygous or heterozygous for those homologous loci. (Recall that homozygous individuals have two identical alleles for a given character, whereas heterozygous individuals have two different alleles for that character.) If all members of a population are homozygous for the same allele, that allele is said to be fixed in the gene pool. Often, however, there are two or more alleles for a gene, each having a relative frequency (proportion) in the gene pool.

An example will make the concept of allele frequency in a gene pool less abstract. Imagine a wildflower population with two varieties contrasting in flower color. An allele for red flowers, which we will symbolize by R, is completely dominant to an allele for white flowers, symbolized by r. For our simplified situation, these are the only two alleles for this locus in the population. Suppose an imaginary population has 500 plants, and 20 of these plants have white flowers because they are homozygous for the recessive allele; their genotype is rr. The other 480 plants have red flowers; some of them will be homozygous (RR) and others will be heterozygous (Rr). Suppose that 320 plants are RR homozygotes and 160 are Rr heterozygotes. Because these are diploid organisms, there are a total of 1,000 copies of genes for flower color in the population of 500 individuals. The dominant allele (R) accounts for 800 of these genes (320 &#160;X&#160; 2 = 640 for RR plants, plus 160 &#160;X&#160; 1 = 160 for Rr individuals). Thus, the frequency of the R allele in the gene pool of this population is 800/1,000 = 0.8 = 80% . And because there are only two allelic forms of the gene, the r allele must have a frequency of 0.2, or 20% .




