
 Every cell has a voltage, or membrane potential, across its plasma membrane

As we saw in Chapter 8, all living cells have an electrical charge difference (electrical potential, or voltage) across their plasma membranes. This membrane potential exists because of the different concentrations of ions on the inside and outside of a cell: Anions are more concentrated inside a cell and cations are more concentrated in the extracellular fluid. As a result, the plasma membrane is electrically polarized, meaning that it is more negatively charged on one side than on the other.

Measuring Membrane Potentials

Electrophysiologists can measure a cell's membrane potential as a voltage by using microelectrodes connected to a sensitive voltmeter or oscilloscope (FIGURE 48.6a). Precise mechanical devices called micromanipulators (seen next to the microscope in FIGURE 48.6b) are used to position one electrode just inside the cell for comparison with a reference electrode located outside the cell. The voltmeter indicates the magnitude of the charge separation across the membrane, typically about -50 to -100 mV (millivolts) in an animal cell. The minus sign indicates that the inside of the cell is negative in charge with respect to the outside. A neuron in its resting state (that is, not transmitting an electrical signal) usually has a membrane potential of about -70 mV (about 5%  of the voltage in a flashlight battery). This membrane potential of an unstimulated neuron is called the resting potential.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-6. Measuring membrane potentials. (a) Microelectrodes inside and outside the cell measure the voltage (membrane potential) across a cell's plasma membrane. (b) Apparatus for measuring membrane potentials.

A number of invertebrates, including squid, lobsters, and earthworms, have some unusually large neurons that make excellent research models for studying nerve impulses. For example, the squid nervous system includes some neurons whose axons have diameters of about 1 mm. These giant axons are relatively easy to impale with microelectrodes. Once the electrodes are in place, they can be used to measure the voltage of the resting potential as well as to record changes in voltage due to ion currents that occur during the transmission of a nerve impulse. Much of the pioneering research on membrane potentials and on the nature of nerve signals was performed using squid giant axons.

How a Cell Maintains a Membrane Potential

The membrane potential exists because of differences in the ionic composition of the intracellular and extracellular fluids. The selective permeability of the plasma membrane maintains these ionic differences, which are shown in FIGURE 48.7a. Inside a cell the principal cation is potassium (K+), although there is also some sodium (Na+). Outside a cell the situation is reversed, with Na+ the principal cation and K+ having a much lower concentration. Inside a cell the principal anions are proteins, amino acids, sulfate, phosphate, and other negatively charged ions that we can group and symbolize by A-; chloride (Cl-) is also present but in a relatively low concentration. Outside a cell, Cl- is the main anion, with other anions present but less important in the context of membrane potentials.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-7. The basis of the membrane potential. (a) Shown here are the approximate concentrations for a mammalian cell (in millimoles per liter, abbreviated mM) of potassium, [K+]; sodium [Na+]; chloride, [Cl-]; and anions that remain inside the cell, [A-]. K+ diffuses out of the cell down its concentration gradient, but the A- anions cannot follow, so the interior of the cell develops a net negative charge. (b) There is a steady diffusion of K+ out of the cell and steady diffusion of Na+ into the cell; the thickness of the arrows indicates the relative permeability of the membrane to K+ and Na+ (the permeability mainly reflects the number of ion-specific channels). Over time, diffusion would cause the ionic gradients shown in part (a) to dissipate. Dissipation is prevented by the sodium-potassium pump, which uses ATP to actively transport Na+ out of the cell and K+ into the cell.

Recall from Chapter 8 that the plasma membrane is a phospholipid bilayer with associated membrane proteins. Ions, being electrically charged, cannot dissolve in lipid and therefore cannot directly diffuse across the lipid bilayer of the plasma membrane. In order to cross the membrane, ions must either be pumped by membrane proteins or move passively through ion channels, which are aqueous pores made up of specific transmembrane protein molecules. These channels are selective for specific ions; some allow only Na+ to cross, others allow only K+, and still others only Cl-. Depending on how many ion channels of each kind are present in the plasma membrane of a cell, it is possible for the membrane to have very different permeabilities to different ions. Most cells, including neurons, have much greater permeability to K+ than to Na+, suggesting that the membrane has many more potassium channels than sodium channels (FIGURE 48.7b). In a resting neuron, for instance, potassium permeability is about fiftyfold higher than sodium permeability. Because the internal anions (A-) are primarily large organic molecules such as proteins, they cannot cross the membrane and thus are a pool of internal negative charge that remains in the cell.

Although selective ion channels control the types of ions that diffuse passively into and out of a cell, they do not determine the direction or rate of passage. As you learned in Chapter 8, ions diffuse down an electrochemical gradient made up of two components: the concentrations of the specific ion in different regions (its chemical gradient); and the relative electrical charge in those regions (the electrical gradient). We would expect the ions that pass through ion channels to diffuse along the electrochemical gradient until reaching an equilibrium point when each type of ion enters the cell at the same rate it exits. Given this tendency toward equilibrium, how does a cell establish and maintain the distribution of ions shown in FIGURE 48.7a?

Consider the case of potassium ions. There is a large concentration gradient for diffusion of K+ out of the cell, and the membrane has a high permeability to potassium. Thus, there is a net outward flux (efflux) of K+, which transfers positive charge from the inside to the outside of the cell. Since negative charge, in the form of large anions (A-), is trapped within the cell, the inside of the cell becomes progressively more negative with respect to the outside, creating an electrical gradient across the membrane. In essence, this electrical gradient competes with the K+ concentration gradient: The increasing negative charge inside the cell attracts positively charged potassium, supporting an influx of K+.

If K+ were the only ion that could cross the membrane, the voltage across the membrane would continue to build up until the influx of K+ down the electrical gradient exactly balanced the efflux of K+ down its concentration gradient. At that point, there would be no further net transfer of charge across the membrane, and the membrane potential would reach a stable, resting value. For the potassium concentration gradient shown in FIGURE 48.7a, which is typical of a resting neuron, a stable membrane potential of about -85 mV would be required to exactly counterbalance the concentration gradient of K+. This value of the membrane potential is called the equilibrium potential for potassium ions, because it is the potential at which there will be no net movement of K+ across the membrane (in other words, potassium is at equilibrium).

Potassium, however, is not the only ion to which the plasma membrane is permeable. Although the membrane is much less permeable to Na+ than to K+, the permeability to Na+ is not zero (see FIGURE 48.7b). For sodium, both the concentration gradient (higher sodium concentration outside the cell) and the electrical gradient (more negative charge inside the cell) tend to move sodium ions into the cell. The resulting steady trickle of positive charge into the cell, carried by Na+, makes the actual value of the membrane potential somewhat more positive than would be expected if the membrane were permeable only to potassium ions. This explains why the membrane potential of a resting neuron is typically about -70 mV rather than about -85 mV.

Over time, a steady influx of sodium would cause a progressive increase in the sodium concentration inside a cell. Also, because the influx of Na+ makes the cell interior less negative than the -85 mV required to balance the potassium concentration gradient, there would be a steady efflux of potassium and a progressive decline in the internal K+ concentration. In other words, if the situation were left unchecked, the concentration gradients for Na+ and K+ shown in FIGURE 48.7a would gradually dissipate. This equilibrium is prevented by the sodium-potassium pump shown in FIGURE 48.7b. This protein, found in abundance in neurons, uses energy from ATP to drive the active transport of sodium back out of the cell, against both the concentration and electrical gradients for sodium. At the same time, the pump moves potassium into the cell, thus restoring the concentration gradient for this ion as well (see FIGURE 8.14 for details). In essence, the cell uses metabolic energy, in the form of ATP, to maintain the ionic gradients across the membrane that give rise to the steady-state membrane potential.




