
 Organic chemistry is the study of carbon compounds

Compounds containing carbon are said to be organic, and the branch of chemistry that specializes in the study of carbon compounds is called organic chemistry. Once thought to come only from living things, organic compounds range from simple molecules, such as carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4), to colossal ones, such as proteins, with thousands of atoms and molecular weights in excess of 100,000 daltons. Most organic compounds contain hydrogen atoms.

The overall percentages of the major elements of life--C, H, O, N, S, and P--are quite uniform from one organism to another. Because of carbon's versatility, however, this limited assortment of atomic building blocks, taken in roughly the same proportions, can be used to build an inexhaustible variety of organic molecules. Different species of organisms, and different individuals within a species, are distinguished by variations in their organic molecules.

Since the dawn of human history, people have used other organisms as sources of valued substances--from foods to medicines and fabrics. The science of organic chemistry originated in attempts to purify and improve the yield of such products. By the early 19th century, chemists had learned to make many simple compounds in the laboratory by combining elements under the right conditions. Artificial synthesis of the complex molecules extracted from living matter seemed impossible, however. It was at that time that the Swedish chemist J&ouml;ns Jakob Berzelius first made the distinction between organic compounds, those that seemingly could arise only within living organisms, and inorganic compounds, those that were found in the nonliving world. The new discipline of organic chemistry was first built on a foundation of vitalism, the belief in a life force outside the jurisdiction of physical and chemical laws.

Chemists began to chip away at the foundation of vitalism when they learned to synthesize organic compounds in their laboratories. In 1828, Friedrich W&ouml;hler, a German chemist who had studied with Berzelius, attempted to make an inorganic salt, ammonium cyanate, by mixing solutions of ammonium (NH4+) and cyanate (CNO-) ions. W&ouml;hler was astonished to find that instead of the expected product, he had made urea, an organic compound present in the urine of animals. W&ouml;hler challenged the vitalists when he wrote, "I must tell you that I can prepare urea without requiring a kidney or an animal, either man or dog." However, one of the ingredients used in the synthesis, the cyanate, had been extracted from animal blood, and the vitalists were not swayed by W&ouml;hler's discovery. However, a few years later, Hermann Kolbe, a student of W&ouml;hler's, made the organic compound acetic acid from inorganic substances that could themselves be prepared directly from pure elements.

The foundation of vitalism finally crumbled after several more decades of laboratory synthesis of increasingly complex organic compounds. In 1953, Stanley Miller, then a graduate student at the University of Chicago, helped bring this abiotic (nonliving) synthesis of organic compounds into the context of evolution. Miller used a laboratory simulation of chemical conditions on the primitive Earth to demonstrate that the spontaneous synthesis of organic compounds could have been an early stage in the origin of life (FIGURE 4.1).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 4-1. Abiotic synthesis of organic compounds under "early Earth" conditions. Here Stanley Miller re-creates his 1953 experiment, a laboratory simulation demonstrating that environmental conditions on the lifeless, primordial Earth allowed the spontaneous synthesis of some organic molecules. Miller used electrical discharges (simulated lightning) to trigger reactions in a primitive "atmosphere" of H2O, H2, NH3 (ammonia), and CH4 (methane)--some of the gases released by volcanoes. From these ingredients, Miller's apparatus made a variety of organic compounds that play key roles in living cells. Similar chemical reactions may have set the stage for the origin of life on Earth, a hypothesis we will explore in more detail in Chapter 26.

The pioneers of organic chemistry helped shift the mainstream of biological thought from vitalism to mechanism, the belief that all natural phenomena, including the processes of life, are governed by physical and chemical laws. Organic chemistry was redefined as the study of carbon compounds, regardless of their origin. Most naturally occurring organic compounds are produced by organisms, and these molecules represent a diversity and range of complexity unrivaled by inorganic compounds. However, the same rules of chemistry apply to inorganic and organic molecules alike. The foundation of organic chemistry is not some intangible life force, but the unique chemical versatility of the element carbon.




