
 The five-kingdom system reflected increased knowledge of life's diversity

Systematists have traditionally considered the kingdom to be the highest--the most inclusive--taxonomic category. Many of us grew up with the notion that there are only two kingdoms of life--plants and animals--because we live in a macroscopic, terrestrial realm where we rarely see organisms that do not fit neatly into a plant-animal dichotomy. The two-kingdom scheme also had a long tradition in formal taxonomy; Linnaeus divided all known forms of life between the plant and animal kingdoms.

Even with the discovery of the diverse microbial world, the two-kingdom system persisted. Bacteria were placed in the plant kingdom, their rigid cell walls cited as justification. Eukaryotic unicellular organisms with chloroplasts were also considered plants. Fungi, too, fell under the plant banner, partly because they are sedentary, even though no fungi are photosynthetic and they have little in common structurally with green plants. In the two-kingdom system, unicellular creatures that move and ingest food--protozoa--were called animals. Microbes such as Euglena that move but are photosynthetic were claimed by both botanists and zoologists and showed up in the taxonomies of plant and animal kingdoms alike. Schemes with additional kingdoms were proposed, but none became popular with the majority of biologists until Robert H. Whittaker, of Cornell University, argued effectively for a five-kingdom system in 1969. Whittaker designated these five kingdoms as Monera, Protista, Plantae, Fungi, and Animalia (FIGURE 26.15).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 26-15. Whittaker's five-kingdom system.

The five-kingdom system recognized the two fundamentally different types of cells, prokaryotic and eukaryotic, and set the prokaryotes apart from all eukaryotes by placing them in their own kingdom, Monera.

Whittaker distinguished three kingdoms of multicellular eukaryotes--Plantae, Fungi, and Animalia--partly on the criterion of nutrition. Plants are autotrophic in nutritional mode, making their food by photosynthesis. Fungi are heterotrophic organisms that are absorptive in nutritional mode. Most fungi are decomposers that live embedded in their food source, secreting digestive enzymes and absorbing the small organic molecules that are the products of digestion. Most animals live by ingesting food and digesting it within specialized cavities.

We are left with the kingdom Protista. In Whittaker's five-kingdom system, Protista consisted of all eukaryotes that did not fit the definition of plants, fungi, or animals. Most protists are unicellular forms. However, the boundaries of Whittaker's kingdom Protista were expanded to include some multicellular organisms, such as seaweeds, because of their relationships to certain unicellular protists. With such refinements, the five-kingdom system prevailed in biology for over 20 years.




