
 The study of metabolic defects provided evidence that genes specify proteins

In 1909, British physician Archibald Garrod was the first to suggest that genes dictate phenotypes through enzymes that catalyze specific chemical reactions in the cell. Garrod postulated that the symptoms of an inherited disease reflect a person's inability to make a particular enzyme. He referred to such diseases as "inborn errors of metabolism." Garrod gave as one example the hereditary condition called alkaptonuria, in which the urine is black because it contains the chemical alkapton, which darkens upon exposure to air. Garrod reasoned that normal individuals have an enzyme that breaks down alkapton, whereas alkaptonuric individuals have inherited an inability to make the enzyme that metabolizes alkapton.

How Genes Control Metabolism: One Gene-One Enzyme

Garrod's idea was ahead of its time, but research conducted several decades later supported his hypothesis that a gene dictates the production of a specific enzyme. Biochemists accumulated much evidence that cells synthesize and degrade most organic molecules via metabolic pathways, in which each chemical reaction in a sequence is catalyzed by a specific enzyme. Such metabolic pathways lead, for instance, to the synthesis of the pigments that give fruit flies (Drosophila) their eye color (see FIGURE 15.2). In the 1930s, George Beadle and Boris Ephrussi speculated that each of the various mutations affecting eye color in Drosophila blocks pigment synthesis at a specific step by preventing production of the enzyme that catalyzes that step. However, neither the chemical reactions nor the enzymes that catalyze them were known at the time.

A breakthrough in demonstrating the relationship between genes and enzymes came a few years later, when Beadle and Edward Tatum began working with a bread mold, Neurospora crassa. They treated Neurospora with X-rays and then looked among the survivors for mutants that differed from the wild-type mold in their nutritional needs. Wild-type Neurospora has modest food requirements. It can survive in the laboratory on agar (a moist support medium) mixed only with inorganic salts, glucose, and the vitamin biotin. From this minimal medium, the mold uses its metabolic pathways to produce all the other molecules it needs. Beadle and Tatum identified mutants that could not survive on minimal medium, apparently because they were unable to synthesize certain essential molecules from the minimal ingredients. However, most such nutritional mutants can survive on a complete growth medium, minimal medium supplemented with all 20 amino acids and a few other nutrients.

To characterize the metabolic defect in each nutritional mutant, Beadle and Tatum took samples from the mutant growing on complete medium and distributed them to a number of different vials. Each vial contained minimal medium plus a single additional nutrient. The particular supplement that allowed growth indicated the metabolic defect. For example, if the only supplemented vial that supported growth of the mutant was the one fortified with the amino acid arginine, the researchers could conclude that the mutant was defective in the biochemical pathway that wild-type cells use to synthesize arginine.

Beadle and Tatum went on to pin down each mutant's defect more specifically. Their work with arginine-requiring mutants was especially instructive. Using genetic crosses, they determined that their mutants fell into three classes, each mutated in a different gene. The researchers then showed that they could distinguish among the classes of mutants nutritionally by additional tests of their growth requirements (FIGURE 17.1). In the synthetic pathway leading to arginine, they suspected, a precursor nutrient is converted to ornithine, which is converted to citrulline, which is converted to arginine. When they tested their arginine mutants for growth on ornithine and citrulline, they found that one class could grow on either compound (or arginine), the second class only on citrulline (or arginine), and the third on neither--it absolutely required arginine. The three classes of mutants, the researchers reasoned, must be blocked at different steps in the pathway that synthesizes arginine, with each mutant class lacking the enzyme that catalyzes the blocked step.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 17-1. Beadle and Tatum's evidence for the one gene-one enzyme hypothesis. In this experiment, the researchers studied three classes of mutants of the mold Neurospora crassa, all defective in synthesizing the amino acid arginine. The wild-type strain requires only a minimal nutritional medium for growth; it makes arginine by using a multistep pathway in which ornithine and citrulline are intermediates. The different types of mutants had different growth requirements. Beadle and Tatum concluded that each gene mutated must normally dictate the production of one enzyme: the one gene--one enzyme hypothesis.

Because each mutant was defective in a single gene, Beadle and Tatum's results provided strong support for the one gene-one enzyme hypothesis, as they dubbed it, which states that the function of a gene is to dictate the production of a specific enzyme. The researchers also showed how a combination of genetics and biochemistry could be used to work out the steps in a metabolic pathway. Further support for the one gene-one enzyme hypothesis came with biochemical experiments that identified the specific enzymes lacking in the mutants.

One Gene-One Polypeptide

As researchers learned more about proteins, they made minor revisions in the one gene-one enzyme hypothesis. Not all proteins are enzymes. Keratin, the structural protein of animal hair, and the hormone insulin are two examples of nonenzyme proteins. Because proteins that are not enzymes are nevertheless gene products, molecular biologists began to think in terms of one gene-one protein. However, many proteins are constructed from two or more different polypeptide chains, and each polypeptide is specified by its own gene. For example, hemoglobin, the oxygen-transporting protein of vertebrate red blood cells, is built from two kinds of polypeptides, and thus two genes code for this protein (see FIGURE 5.23b). We can therefore restate Beadle and Tatum's idea as the one gene-one polypeptide hypothesis. Note, however, that it is common to refer to proteins, rather than polypeptides, as the gene products, a practice you will encounter in this book.




