
 Structural and biochemical adaptations help seaweeds survive and reproduce at the ocean's margins

Seaweeds, along with many animals and other heterotrophs these algae support, inhabit the intertidal and subtidal zones of coastal waters. The intertidal zone presents unique challenges to life. At times it is violently active, churned by waves and wind. Two times each day, at low tide, intertidal seaweeds are exposed to the drying atmosphere and rays of the sun. Twice each day, at high tide, the same seaweeds are submerged. Seaweeds have unique structural and biochemical adaptations that enable them to survive and thrive in this rough-and-tumble environment.

Seaweeds have the most complex multicellular anatomy of all algae. Some even have differentiated tissues and organs that resemble those we find in plants. The similarities evolved independently in the algal and plant lineages and are thus analogous, not homologous. The term thallus (plural, thalli; from the Greek thallos, sprout) is used for a seaweed body that is plantlike, but a thallus lacks true roots, stems, and leaves. A typical seaweed thallus consists of a rootlike holdfast, which anchors the alga, and a stemlike stipe, which supports leaflike blades (FIGURE 28.19). The blades provide most of the surface for photosynthesis. Some brown algae are equipped with floats, which keep the blades near the water surface. Beyond the intertidal zone in deeper waters live the giant seaweeds known as kelps (FIGURE 28.20). The stipes of these brown algae may be as long as 60 m.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 28-19. Seaweeds: adapted to life at the ocean's margins. The sea palm, Postelsia, lives on rocks in the crashing surf along the coast of the northwestern United States and Canada. Its thallus is well adapted to maintaining a firm foothold in this extreme environment. Postelsia is a brown alga (Phaeophyta).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 28-20. A kelp forest. The great kelp beds of temperate coastal waters provide habitat and food for a variety of organisms, including many species of fish caught by humans. The kelps, brown algae (Phaeophyta), are prodigiously productive. This brown alga, Macrocystis, common along the U.S. Pacific coast, grows to a length of more than 60 m in a single season, the fastest linear growth of any organism. Kelp is a renewable resource reaped by special boats that cut and collect the tops of the algae.

In addition to these structural adaptations of thalli, some seaweeds are also endowed with biochemical adaptations to intertidal and subtidal conditions. For example, their cell walls are composed of cellulose and gel-forming polysaccharides, accounting for the slimy and rubbery feel of many seaweeds. These substances help cushion the thalli against the agitation of the waves.

Seaweeds are an important source of food and other commodities for humans. Coastal people, particularly in Asia, harvest seaweeds for food. For example, in Japan and Korea, the brown alga Laminaria is used in soups (Japanese "kombu"), and the red alga Porphyra is used to wrap sushi (Japanese "nori"). Marine algae are rich in iodine and other essential minerals, but much of their organic material consists of unusual polysaccharides that humans cannot digest, which prevents seaweeds from becoming staple foods. They are used mostly for their rich tastes and unusual textures. The gel-forming substances in their cell walls (algin in brown algae, agar and carageenan in red algae) are extracted in commercial operations. These substances are widely used in the manufacture of thickeners for such processed foods as puddings and salad dressing and as lubricants in oil drilling, and agar is used as the gel-forming base for microbiological culture media.




