
THE BIODIVERSITY CRISIS

 

 The three levels of biodiversity are genetic diversity, species diversity, and ecosystem diversity



 

 Biodiversity at all three levels is vital to human welfare



 

 The four major threats to biodiversity are habitat destruction, introduced species, overexploitation, and food chain disruptions



Extinction is a natural phenomenon that has been occurring almost since life first evolved; it is the current rate of extinction that underlies the biodiversity crisis. Because we can only estimate the number of species currently existing, we cannot determine the actual rate of species loss or the real magnitude of the biodiversity crisis. We do know for certain that we are experiencing a high rate of species extinction caused by an escalating rate of ecosystem degradation by a single species--Homo sapiens. Conservation biology is about trying to understand what is happening to biodiversity, why it is happening, and what we can do about it.





CONSERVATION AT THE POPULATION AND SPECIES LEVELS

 

 According to the small-population approach, a population's small size can draw it into an extinction vortex



 

 The declining-population approach is a proactive conservation strategy for detecting, diagnosing, and halting population declines



 

 Conserving species involves weighing conflicting demands



Among biologists focusing on conservation at the population and species levels, there are two main approaches, which we will call the small-population approach and the declining-population approach.





CONSERVATION AT THE COMMUNITY, ECOSYSTEM, AND LANDSCAPE LEVELS

 

 Edges and corridors can strongly influence landscape biodiversity



 

 Conservation biologists face many challenges in setting up protected areas



 

 Nature reserves must be functional parts of landscapes



 

 Restoring degraded areas is an increasingly important conservation effort



 

 The goal of sustainable development is reorienting ecological research and challenging all of us to reassess our values



 

 The future of the biosphere may depend on our biophilia



Most preservation efforts in the past have focused on saving endangered species, but today, conservation biology increasingly aims to sustain the biodiversity of entire communities and ecosystems. On a broader scale yet, the principles of community and ecosystem ecology are being brought to bear on studies of the biodiversity of whole landscapes. In an ecological sense, a landscape is a regional assemblage of interacting ecosystems, such as a forest or forest patches, adjacent open fields, wetlands, streams, and streamside (riparian) habitats.

Landscape ecology is the application of ecological principles to the study of human land-use patterns. Understanding landscape dynamics is critically important in conservation because many species use more than one kind of ecosystem, and many live on the borders between ecosystems. The goal of landscape ecology, of which ecosystem management is part, is to understand patterns of landscape use in the past, present, and foreseeable future and to make biodiversity conservation a functional part of the picture. Such a broad view requires understanding community and ecosystem ecology as well as human population dynamics and economics.




