WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Australian Prime Minister John Howard complained to President Clinton on Monday about punitive U.S. tariffs on foreign lamb but said the dispute should not be allowed to mar relations between the United States and Australia .
`` We 're very disappointed and upset and cranky about the U.S. lamb decision , '' the prime minister said after a White House luncheon with Clinton .
After one rounds of questions from reporters , Howard said at a brief evening news conference that he was `` lambed out '' on the issue and would have no more comment .
Howard paused to talk with reporters outside the White House .
Standing under an umbrella in the rain , he said he told Clinton the lamb decision triggered perhaps the biggest trade row ever in Australia .
`` We 're upset at the decision , but it 's not going to be changed , '' Howard said .
`` I understand that .
Does n't make it any easier for us .
We do n't agree with the decision .
Equally we ca n't allow it to contaminate a broader relationship -- certainly not the security aspects of that relationship .
The U.S. tariffs are intended to protect American lamb producers threatened by imports from New Zealand and Australia , which between them account for 95 percent of the lamb imported into the United States .
American ranchers had complained that current tariffs of less than 1 percent were too low to protect them from foreign competitors flooding the U.S. market with exports .
Under new tariffs , a border tax of 9 percent will be imposed on the first 31,851 metric tons , the amount of lamb imported last year .
Shipments above that will carry a 40 percent tariff .
Howard said the tariffs `` caused the most adverse reaction of any trade decision the United States has taken in recent times .
I ca n't think of one that 's caused a more adverse reaction in Australia .
I told the president that .
I told those who were at the lunch that .
`` Now , that does n't mean that you allow it to contaminate other aspects of a very broad and a very deep relationship , '' he added .
Howard said he and Clinton spent much of their time discussing East Timor .
`` Indonesia deserved from the world perhaps a little more credit and a little more praise and understanding for the transition that was occurring in that country towards a more democratic system of government , '' Howard said , relating what he told Clinton .
`` We remain very strongly committed to a clean and open ballot in East Timor to determine the fate of that territory , '' Howard said , but he added that `` it 's important to keep things in proportion '' .
After seeing Clinton , Howard met with Barry McCaffrey , White House director for drug policy , to discuss a commitment to a drug-free Olympics in Sydney next year and ways to stop drug trafficking .
The White House played down the lamb tariff dispute .
Presidential spokesman Joe Lockhart said Clinton spoke with Howard and New Zealand Prime Minister Jenny Shipley before announcing the decision .
`` So I think they understand our view , '' Lockhart said .
He said the International Trade Commission on lamb supported Clinton 's position .
Lockhart said that despite the dispute , `` We have a very strong and broad -based relationship with Australia .
And I do n't expect this particular trade dispute to sour that relationship . ''
`` From time to time we have trade issues with allies around the world and try to resolve them in the best way we can , '' Lockhart said .
`` But this is a very strong relationship that certainly can be sustained despite disputes that arise from time to time . ''
After seeing Clinton , Howard met with Barry McCaffrey , White House director for drug policy to discuss a commitment to a drug-free Olympics in Sydney next year and ways to stop drug trafficking .
