MANCHESTER , N.H. --
The Cold War is over .
The nation is at peace .
The United States is indisputably the world 's dominant power .
The big international issues -- whether the United States should actively promote democracy , protect freedom and encourage trade around the globe -- find the major candidates in broad agreement .
So perhaps it is not surprising that questions about foreign policy are often raised as an afterthought in Campaign 2000 .
The hottest foreign affairs controversy of the campaign did not involve Russia , China or the World Trade Organization .
Instead , it was over the appropriateness of Boston TV reporter Andy Hiller springing a world leaders `` pop-quiz '' on Texas Gov. George W. Bush .
-LRB- He failed . -RRB-
Nevertheless , even as Americans thus far have had the luxury of not paying close attention to world affairs during the 2000 campaign , the field presents some fundamental choices .
A careful examination of the candidates ' speeches , position papers and voting records reveals different outlooks on how the nation should interact with the rest of the world , as well as vastly different levels of experience .
Former New Jersey Sen. Bill Bradley is the dove who voted against the 1991 war in Iraq and stands alone against increases in military spending .
Vice President Al Gore is the experienced hand , a pro-defense Democrat who has been active on arms control issues for 15 years and played a more hands-on role with foreign policy than any vice president in history .
Bush is the advocate of a more sharply defined U.S. mission -- what he calls a `` uniquely American internationalism '' -- who favors a harder line on China and Russia and an investment in the military of the future .
Arizona Sen. John McCain is the hawk , a decorated war hero who says the United States should never back down from its role as the world 's supreme power or hesitate to use covert and overt operations to topple governments in rogue nations .
Though the distinctions are real , the similarities in this field are perhaps more striking .
With the exception of longshots Gary Bauer and Alan Keyes , the presidential candidates are staunch internationalists and avid free-traders .
`` They are all centrists -- basic internationalists , '' said James Goldgeier , a professor of International Studies at George Washington University in Washington .
`` The candidates who have articulated anything wildly different -- being very tough on China or withdrawing international commitments -- they do n't exist .
I think the differences between the -LRB- leading candidates -RRB- is on the margins . ''
That is a fact that has been duly noted in capitals around the world .
`` There is a fair amount of difference in rhetoric , '' said a foreign diplomat who has been closely monitoring the campaign .
`` But each of the leading candidates would be a fine president from our point of view .
We do n't have a foreign policy stake in this . ''
Interestingly , stark differences on foreign policy and trade exist within each party .
Democrats and Republicans have fought among themselves in Congress .
But the divide is not playing out in the presidential contest .
Trade -weary Democrats such as House Minority Leader Richard Gephardt , D - Mo. , decided against entering the campaign .
On the Republican side , the most outspoken voice against trade and international involvement -- Pat Buchanan -- left the party , while others like Bauer and Keyes have failed to use the issue to generate much support .
`` The key difference may be experience , '' said McCain foreign policy adviser Randy Scheunemann .
Scheunemann cited McCain 's military record , which includes 51/2 years as a prisoner of war in Hanoi , his leadership in the Senate on Mideast and Eastern Europe issues in the 1980s and his strong support for U.S. military missions in Iraq and Kosovo during the 1990s .
On the campaign trail , no one speaks with more ease about defense issues than McCain , a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee .
Though he is an advocate of a strong military , McCain has also said that at least $ 20 billion a year is wasted on defense pork projects and could be wisely redirected .
McCain was instrumental in helping Clinton resume diplomatic ties with Vietnam and stood behind the United States ' operation in Kosovo , though he is quick to criticize the administration for `` strategic incoherence and self-doubt . ''
As president , McCain says , he would place priority on a `` rogue state rollback , '' arguing that the nation 's central defense concern no longer comes from Russia but from hostile forces in countries like Iraq , North Korea and Libya .
Bush 's foreign policy credentials have been questioned since the beginning of his candidacy .
His reference to Greeks as `` Grecians '' and Kosovars as `` Kosovarians '' did n't help , nor did his failure on Boston 's WHDH - TV in November to come up with the names for the leaders of India , Pakistan or Chechnya .
A decade ago , while Gore , Bradley and McCain were all attending to foreign affairs in the Senate , Bush was handling the affairs of the Texas Rangers as the baseball club 's managing partner .
Bush has countered the perception of weakness by dedicating more campaign time to foreign policy than anyone else in the race .
He has delivered two major addresses on foreign policy in the past four months and has surrounded himself with top-name advisers including former Stanford Provost Condoleezza Rice , former Secretaries of State George Shultz and Don Rumsfeld and former Defense Secretary Dick Cheney .
His speeches have warned against the `` walls of protectionism , '' yet he has also been sharply critical of the Clinton administration 's attempts to forge friendly relations with Russia and China .
`` China is a competitor , not a strategic partner , '' Bush said in a major foreign policy address last fall at the Reagan Library in Simi Valley .
`` We must deal with China without ill will -- but without illusions . ''
Bush has also championed the idea of revamping the military to face the new challenges of the 21st century , warning that many military models are outdated .
`` We really do n't have a competitor on the battlefield , '' Rice said in an interview last week .
`` You would ideally be using this time to plan and research for the future . ''
Bradley moved quickly from NBA stardom to become a protege of renowned Democratic Sen. Scoop Jackson of Washington , traveling frequently to what was then the Soviet Union and becoming an expert on Third World debt .
Bradley calls the U.S. relationship with Russia a `` missed opportunity , '' saying his top priority would be to reduce the number of nuclear warheads .
He criticizes the Clinton administration , and by extension Gore , for placing too much emphasis on a relationship with former Russian President Boris Yeltsin .
During the eight years he served in the Senate with Gore , the two voted together nearly 4 out of 5 times .
But many of the most significant disagreements involved defense matters .
For example , Bradley voted against funds for the B2 bomber , the Seawolf submarine , the MX missile , and anti-ballistic missile research -- all systems Gore supported .
In 1991 , Bradley voted to cut the defense budget by 2 percent and transfer the money to domestic programs .
Gore voted no .
Bradley also voted in favor of base closings , which Gore opposed .
`` Bradley is much more reminiscent of the ' 70s and ' 80s Democratic liberals who were very adverse to seeing America use force , '' said Will Marshall , president of the Progressive Policy Institute , a centrist Democratic think tank .
But not every split is so predictably right-left .
In 1985 , Bradley voted to give $ 100 million in nonmilitary aid to the Contras opposing Nicaragua 's Sandinista regime .
Gore voted no .
The highest-profile difference came in 1991 , when Bradley voted against the U.S. attack on Iraq , while Gore broke with most Democrats and voted in favor .
Gore faces the inherently awkward problem of trying to stake out his own foreign policy identity while serving as first in the line of succession to the commander in chief .
His top credential is his experience .
`` Gore 's got an actual record of effectiveness in foreign affairs that goes way back , '' said a senior aide when asked what distinguishes Gore from the rest of the field .
`` If you drew a column that had Gore 's foreign policy accomplishments on one side and the competition elsewhere , their column would be empty . ''
Gore has been instrumental in developing U.S. foreign policy , particularly in Russia .
His relationship with former Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin was considered crucial in the negotiations that ended the conflict in Kosovo earlier this year .
The vice president 's supporters call him a visionary , scoping out ground as a junior member of the House in the 1980s on matters ranging from arms control to U.S. - Soviet cooperation in space .
His detractors say his emphasis on issues like global warming or international strategies for `` reinventing government '' display a disconnect to the real world .
Global issues could quickly emerge as a sleeping giant in the campaign were an international crisis to arrive .
Yet even if foreign policy differences do n't affect the election , the election will clearly affect foreign policy .
`` I would be hard pressed to say that any of these issues will be decisive in the campaign , '' said Peter Feaver , a professor of political science at Duke University .
`` That does n't mean that the outcome wo n't have a serious impact on our foreign policy , '' he said .
`` The difference , say , between a President Gore and a President Bush is more significant than meets the eye . ''
