BEIJING , March 26 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- US Vice - President Al Gore said here today that his visit to China is a positive step in the development of US - China relations .
Speaking with the press after his meeting with Chinese President Jiang Zemin this afternoon , Gore said his meetings with Jiang , Premier Li Peng and other Chinese leaders have `` provided an opportunity to develop the broad strategic dialogue '' between the two countries .
`` Our discussions are productive , friendly , searching , and above all , wide-ranging , so too were my meetings with Premier Li Peng as well as a number of other members of the Chinese government , '' said Gore .
The vice-president said the purpose of his visit is to `` demonstrate the commitment of the US and the Clinton Administration to our relationship with China and our determination to strengthen and broaden that relationship . ''
Given the enormous importance that we attached to the US - China relationship , there was naturally a very long list of issues of significance to the two nations and the two sides should try to narrow the differences when they existed and to find new ways to deepen their co-operation in those areas in which they agree , he said .
Gore , who is here to make preparations for the exchange of visits on the highest level between the two countries this year and next , said the two sides have reaffirmed that Chinese President Jiang Zemin will visit Washington this autumn while President Clinton will pay a return visit to China next year .
He added that the two countries are working earnestly for this matter .
Gore said the contracts and agreements Boeing and General Motors have signed with China are `` important '' for American business and jobs and an indication of Chinese market 's wider opening to the US business .
The vice-president reiterated US support of China 's membership in the World Trade Organization .
He added that the US and China will seek ways to communicate in a more effective and constructive way to solve the existing differences in such issues as trade and human rights .
This morning , Gore delivered a speech at Qinghua University , one of China 's top institutions of higher learning .
`` At the dawn of a new era in world history , as we look toward the horizon of a new millennium , '' Gore said , the United States and China , `` as friends and partners , are destined to work together in leading the way to a peaceful , prosperous future . ''
The sustained and dramatic economic growth in Asia , and especially here in China , is having a profound impact on prospects for the future here and potentially in the entire world , he said .
`` It 's clear that the nations of East and West must find not only a new way of regarding one another , but basic new ways of working with each other at every level , '' Gore noted .
After the speech , Gore , his wife and entourage toured the Great Wall to the north of Beijing .
Gore , who arrived here Monday evening on an official visit , is scheduled to leave here to proceed to Xi 'an , capital of northwest China 's Shaanxi Province , early Thursday morning .
