HANOI , April 7 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Vietnam agreed officially today to repay the United States about 145 million U.S. dollars in economic debts made by the former Saigon regime during the Vietnam war .
Vietnamese Financial Minister Nguyen Sing Hung and U.S. Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin , the highest-ranking U.S. economic offical to visit the country since the end of the war in 1975 , signed the agreement here .
The agreement is to take effect in 30 days with Hanoi paying a `` down payment '' of more than 8.5 million dollars of interest and regular payments starting in July to extend until the year 2019 .
This agreement results from the multilateral debt agreement Vietnam reached with the Paris Club of western creditor countries in December 1993 , under which the club agreed to cut Vietnam 's debts in half and reschedule more than 4 billion dollars debts owed by both Vietnam and the former Saigon government .
In the Paris Club agreement , Vietnam acknowledged its responsibility for the economic and social debts of the former Saigon regime prior to April 30 , 1975 .
Rubin called the agreement `` a significant step in the normalization of relations '' between the U.S. and Vietnam and `` the integration of Vietnam into the international financial community . ''
He said that `` the signal sent by this agreement will be important to the rest of the world in building confidence in Vietnam in a way that will benefit its economy . ''
`` With Vietnam 's continued cooperation in accounting for American POWs and MIAs , we look forward to working with Vietnam as it continues to make progress toward structural reforms , a market -based economy and regional and global economic integration '' , said Rubin .
Vietnam 's Deputy Foreign Minister Nguyen Dinh Bin hailed the agreement , saying the agreement `` showed the determination of the two sides to get beyond the past to develop new relationship between the two countries . ''
Rubin , who is making an Asian tour including the Philippines and Japan , arrived in Hanoi Sunday for a three-day visit .
Vietnam , which established diplomatic relations with the U.S. in 1995 , has been eager to strike a comprehensive trade agreement with the U.S. and to secure the Most Favored Nation status .
Since U.S. President Bill Clinton lifted the decades -old trade embargo in 1994 , trade and investment ties between the two countries have achieved important development .
The two-way trade came to 1 billion dollars in 1996 , doubling the 1995 figure and 4.5 times that of 1994 while it is expected to rise to 1.5 billion dollars this year .
Having 54 investment projects worth 773 million dollars , the U.S. ranked eighth among foreign investors in Vietnam .
