ISLAMABAD , September 13 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Pakistan is keen to establish closer links and full dialogue partnership with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations -LRB- ASEAN -RRB- .
This was expressed by Pakistan 's Commerce Minister Ahmed Mukhtar in Karachi Thursday while addressing an Indonesian businessmen 's delegation after inaugurating the first single country trade exhibition in the southern port city .
Mukhtar said that Indonesia was a leading member country of ASEAN and Pakistan could use the Indonesian good offices in developing trade and economic relations with the other ASEAN nations .
ASEAN groups Brunei , Indonesia , Malaysia , the Philippines , Singapore , Thailand and Vietnam .
The minister noted that ASEAN was now moving towards establishing an Asian Free Trade Area and it would be quite proper for Pakistan to be within that group to accelerate its own economic development .
Inaugurating the Indonesian exhibition , Mukhtar said that the exhibition , the first single one by any country in Pakistan , was an event signifying the enhancing cooperation between the two countries in the field of trade and investment .
He also said Pakistan 's policy of deregulation , liberal trade and encouragement of private sector enterprises , adopted in the late 1980s , achieved full momentum in 1993-94 when the government finalized and introduced a liberal , snag-free , versatile and multi-dimensional foreign investment code .
Meanwhile , the Special Assistant to Prime Minister on Economic Affairs , Shahid Hasan Khan , said that Pakistan aimed to double the existing volume of trade with Indonesia within the next four years .
Speaking Thursday at a seminar on Indonesia - Pakistan Economic Collaboration in Karachi , Hasan Khan said that the economic and trade ties between Pakistan and Indonesia was not comparable to the socio-political relations being enjoyed by the two countries .
The value of Indonesian exports to Pakistan in the last fiscal year was 118.8 million US dollars while Pakistan 's exports to Indonesia amounted to 102 million dollars , according to Hasan Khan .
Pakistan and Indonesia , both ranking within the top 10 most populous nations in the world , have more similarities than differences , he said , adding the two countries should further enhance their bilateral economic and trade relationship .
