SINGAPORE , February 14 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The 12th ASEAN - E.U. Ministerial Meeting ended here today after issuing a joint declaration which pledged to make efforts to further boost the ties between the two sides .
`` We had a productive and wide-ranging exchange of views on a number of political , security , economic and other issues , '' said the declaration issued by the foreign ministers of the seven-member Association of Southeast Asian Nations -LRB- ASEAN -RRB- and the 15-member European Union -LRB- E.U . -RRB-
after two days of discussion here .
The declaration said , `` While we recognize the existence of internal and external challenges , we believe that our determination to enhance cooperation , peace and prosperity in our two regions will enable us to create a substantive and mutually beneficial relationship . ''
The two sides in the declaration also expressed their commitment `` to reinvigorate and to intensify '' their long-standing dialogue and cooperation on issues such as peace and security , the environment and sustainable development , trade and investment on the basis of partnership , shared responsibility and mutual benefit .
They also pledged to increase economic flows between the two regions , believing that this `` will drive the dynamo in ASEAN - E.U. relations . ''
In the political and security fields , they agreed to share perspectives and information while deepening political dialogue through `` frank discussions of sensitive issues of common concern . ''
`` Where differences exist , the spirit of dialogue and cooperation between ASEAN and E.U. should continue , ... keeping in mind that the aim of the dialogue is to enhance mutual understanding and foster greater cooperation and friendship , '' the declaration said .
The foreign ministers also reaffirmed the importance of mutually beneficial economic cooperation between the two sides , including in trade , business and investment and development .
`` We agreed to take action to consolidate , deepen and diversify E.U. - ASEAN relations in a dynamic manner in particular regarding economic relations .
`` The developments taking place in the two regions give us optimism that there is a great potential for a further strengthening of our economic links , '' they said in the declaration .
ASEAN - E.U. trade has increased significantly .
In 1995 , the value of trade between the two sides reached 86 billion U.S. dollars , almost four times that in 1980 .
Attending the meeting were foreign ministers from the ASEAN countries -- Brunei , Indonesia , Malaysia , Singapore , Thailand , the Philippines and Vietnam -- and those from the E.U. members -- Austria , Belgium , Denmark , Finland , France , Germany , Greece , Ireland , Italy , Luxembourg , Portugal , Spain , Sweden , the Netherlands and the United Kingdom .
