BRUSSELS , August 29 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Commissioner Hans van den Broek today hailed the cooperation between the European Union and Russia as a vital contribution to the maintenance of peace and stability in Europe in the coming century .
The commissioner , responsible for EU 's external relations with central and eastern Europe , said that the EU has reserved part of its energy for the determination to strengthen and deepen the relationship with Russia .
`` The challenges on the eve of the 21st century are not only to stimulate a further development of trade and economic links , '' he told an audience at the Moscow School of Political Studies , `` but also to diversify the relations between EU and Russia and renew our traditional political and cultural ties which are a major component for building a new Europe . ''
In his speech , of which copies were available here , van den Broek said that the time was ripe to broaden the base of EU - Russia relations as the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement will enter into force later this year .
`` The agreement is the centerpiece of our future cooperation in a wide range of areas and we have a common interest in ensuing its rapid implementation , '' he said .
Van den Broek added that new avenues of cooperation can be explored in such sectors as transport , energy , science and technology , space and industry .
Russia is an important trade partner with the 15-nation union .
Forty percent of its total foreign trade is with EU countries .
It is also the largest recipient of EU assistance in projects worth a total of over 1.2 billion ECU -LRB- 1.31 billion U.S. dollars -RRB- .
These projects range from privatization of enterprises to improvement of nuclear safety .
The European commissioner is paying a four-day visit in return for Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin 's visit to the union in July .
He assured the audience at the Moscow School of Political Studies that EU enlargement is designed to strengthen stability and security .
He briefed the audience that the union is considering commencing accession negotiations next year with Poland , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Slovenia , Estonia and Cyprus .
The commissioner is also scheduled to visit St. Petersburg before winding up his trip to Russia .
