NEW DELHI , January 16 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- India and Russia agreed to take appropriate and necessary measures to expand and diversify bilateral trade during a meeting of the Indo - Russian governmental Commission which concluded here on Saturday .
An Indian official said Saturday evening that the two countries were keen to increase trade of non-traditional and hi-tech items to realize the expansion and diversification .
During the two-day meeting of the commission , the official said , both sides expressed satisfaction over the 30-percent increase in bilateral trade during the first half of the current fiscal year which began in April 1999 .
However , he said , India highlighted `` our concern over the decline in tea , tobacco and pharmaceuticals in the trade basket '' and both sides said `` the volume of bilateral trade did not correspond to the existing potential . ''
The commission decided to establish a new working group on cooperation in civil aviation and a new sub-group on industrial realization and commercialization of high technology under the working group on science and technology .
Two -way trade between the two countries amounted to 1.238 billion U.S. dollars in 1998-99 with 715 million dollars .
The first half of the current fiscal year saw a significant improvement in trade between the two countries , which went up by 25 percent , according to an official press release .
The meeting , co-chaired by Russian Deputy Prime Minister Viktor Khristenko and Indian Finance Minister Yashwant Sinha , discussed the possibilities of further cooperation in energy , coal , metallurgy , oil and science and technology .
Russia urged India to use its rupee debt on joint ventures in civil aviation , saying it was profitable for both countries .
Both sides stressed that the long-standing relationship between Moscow and New Delhi should be strengthened into a strategic partnership .
The visiting Russian deputy prime minister called on Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee Friday , during which he assured full support for India 's fight against cross-border terrorism .
Khristenko also discussed relations between the two countries with Indian President Kocheril Raman Narayanan during a meeting here on Saturday .
He handed over a message from Acting President Vladimir Putin to Vajpayee , which said the two countries should develop their old cooperation into strategic partnership .
Khristenko , who arrived here Thursday , said after his meeting with Vajpayee that the two countries would sign a historic declaration on a strategic partnership soon after the presidential elections in his country .
