-----------------------
SULAIMANIYA, Iraq, Jan 30 (Reuters) - 

An Iraqi girl who died on Jan. 17 in the Kurdish city of Sulaimaniya,
had bird flu, Iraq's health minister said on Monday, despite the World
Health Organisation (WHO) having initially ruled that out.

"The test of Tijan's blood emphasised that she had bird flu from the
kind that kills humans," Health Minister Abdul Muttalib Mohammed Ali
told a news briefing in Sulaimaniya, referring to the teenager, Tijan
Abdel-Qader.

-----------------------
BBC 1/31 15:58 GMT

Twelve people suspected of having the H5N1 strain of bird flu are
being treated in Kurdistan in northern Iraq, officials say.

Iraqi authorities have begun culling poultry in the region and the
World Health Organisation (WHO) will send a team of experts there on
Wednesday.

A 54-year-old woman from the town of Raniya is thought to be the most
serious of the suspected cases.  

Iraqi officials say a teenage girl died of the strain two weeks ago.

Shanjin Abdel Qader died in a hospital in the nearby city of
Sulaimaniya on 17 January, after an illness lasting 15 days. 

The head of the committee set up to fight the spread of the virus said
they had begun culling birds in the regions north of Sulaimaniya near
Lake Dukan, in Raniya, and north of Arbil.

"So far we have killed 500,000 birds. In some of these areas we have
killed 50% of all birds and in others only 30%," Tahsin Namiq said.


-----------------------
Mercury News, AP 1/30

A 15-year-old Kurdish girl who died this month had the deadly H5N1
strain, Iraq and U.N. health officials said.

The discovery prompted a large-scale slaughter of domestic birds in
the northern area where the teen died as the World Health Organization
formed an emergency team to try to contain the disease's spread.

World Health Organization officials confirmed the finding, though it
was not immediately clear how the girl, Shangen Abdul Qader, who died
Jan. 17 in the northern Kurdish town of Raniya, contracted the
disease.

-----------------------
Aljazeera.net  Wednesday 18 January 2006, 17:05 Makka Time, 14:05 GMT

Health officials in northern Iraq have sent samples to Jordan for
testing for the bird flu virus H5N1 after a 14-year-old girl died in
the Kurdish city of Sulaimaniya.

Tijan Abd al-Qadir died on arrival at the main hospital on Tuesday
after falling ill 15 days earlier in her home town of Raniya, in
Kurdistan close to the Turkish and Iranian borders, Muhammad Khashnow,
the Kurdish regional health minister has said.

-----------------------
Yahoo News  By Twana Osman 1/18 3:24 ET
SULAIMANIYA, Iraq (Reuters) - 

Health officials in northern Iraq have sent samples to Jordan for
testing for the bird flu virus H5N1 after a 14-year-old girl died in
the Kurdish city of Sulaimaniya, officials said on Wednesday.

Tijan Abdel-Qader died on arrival at the main hospital on Tuesday
after falling ill 15 days earlier in her home town of Raniya, in
Kurdistan close to the Turkish and Iranian borders, Kurdish regional
health minister Mohammed Khashnow said.
