AMMAN , Jordan
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Not only did King Hussein spend his 46th anniversary as Jordan 's monarch being treated for cancer in an American hospital .
Worse , gossip back home about his illness became so frenzied that he had to deny rumors about who would succeed him .
The king 's illness has set off deep worries about the future in this small Middle Eastern country ruled by Hussein 's family since its founding in the 1920s as Transjordan .
`` This issue is as popular with Jordanians as the Lewinsky affair with the Americans , '' legislator Mohammed Oueidi Abbadi says .
Concern is n't limited to Jordan .
The pro- American Hussein has been a moderating influence in the region , and any instability in Jordan would be a potential snag to peace efforts .
The king 's hospitalization at the Mayo Clinic since July , his second bout with cancer in six years , has brought talk of him possibly stepping down .
Hussein named his brother Hassan as successor in 1965 , but rumors have spread of a change of mind .
There also are rumors of dissension over the issue in the royal family and of the American -born Queen Noor maneuvering for her eldest son to be chosen king .
Many people have long expressed worries that 51-year -old Crown Prince Hassan , who is far less charismatic than his older brother , would have a hard time steering Jordan through the minefield of Middle East politics .
Hussein , who has survived wars and assassination attempts , is known for his military bearing .
By contrast , Hassan is an Oxford graduate with more the demeanor of a scholar .
He has emerged from his brother 's shadow by taking on more royal duties in recent years , but is still a remote figure to many Jordanians .
The succession speculation comes at a shaky time , with Jordan possibly facing a change in its character from a proposed confederation with the Palestinian entity that might emerge from Mideast peace talks .
More than half Jordan 's 3.8 million people already are Palestinian , so such a confederation would reduce the Bedouin tribes loyal to the king to a small minority .
With rumors flying , King Hussein sought in mid- August to quiet speculation about a succession battle in an interview from his room in the Mayo Clinic in Rochester , Minnesota .
`` The heir to the throne is my brother , whom I have chosen over many others in the past years , and he has proved to be up to the responsibility , '' Hussein told Radio Monte Carlo , a popular Arabic station .
Still , gossip has persisted about other potential successors , among them Hussein 's five sons from his four marriages and Prince Rashid , 19 , son of Hassan and Pakistani -born Princess Savarth .
Sources close to the royal family and Western diplomats say Queen Noor is ruffling family feathers by grooming their 18-year -old son , Prince Hamzah , to take the throne , possibly without Hassan ever serving as king .
The queen , American -born Lisa Halaby , who converted to Islam upon her marriage in 1978 , denies there is dissension within the family .
`` I am committed to supporting who is best qualified to rule Jordan , '' Noor said on CNN .
Hussein has a vision of the future ruler , she said , and `` I trust my husband 's instincts . ''
But the speculation about Prince Hamzah has been fed by his father , too .
The king has taken Hamzah along on state visits , and he sent an emotional public letter to the prince on his 18th birthday in March , recalling how tough it was when , at age 17 , Hussein himself took the throne .
When Hussein revealed his illness on state television in July , he assured the public he was not yet ready to step down .
Public figures also have said they doubt Hussein would take such a step .
But fears over the future persist in a country where most citizens have known no ruler but Hussein .
`` He is a father of all Jordanians , '' architect Majd Safi said , sitting with friends at an Amman coffee house .
`` Our country will never be the same without him . ''
