AMMAN , Jordan
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Gravely ill with cancer , King Hussein arrived home today to a nation deeply worried about what their monarch 's death could mean for the future .
The 63-year -old ruler left an American hospital the night before after his body rejected a bone marrow transplant meant to fight off his lymphatic cancer .
A royal statement said the king was returning to his homeland at his own `` persistent wish . ''
Aides carried Hussein , who was attached to an IV , off the plane on a stretcher , said royal palace officials .
His face flushed , he repeatedly reached for the hand of his American -born wife , Queen Noor .
Sobs from female relatives interrupted the somber silence , said the officials , who spoke on condition of anonymity .
Hours later , asked how grave the situation was , an official said the king 's liver and kidneys had failed , his brain had stopped functioning and he was surviving on life support .
Journalists were not allowed to see the 63-year -old king , who arrived from the United States on a private jet at the Queen Alia International Airport on the outskirts of Amman .
Family members , including Crown Prince Abdullah , the king 's 37-year -old son and heir , met the monarch .
Hussein was accompanied on the flight by Noor and others in the royal family .
A motorcade of more than 70 cars escorted by the king 's elite security detachment drove slowly from the airport .
Two ambulances , one of them carrying the king , drove at its head .
The streets were blocked to the hospital , which was heavily guarded .
Prince Hassan , whom Hussein deposed as heir last month , arrived at the hospital shortly after the king 's motorcade .
An official announcement had said the king would be flown by helicopter to the military hospital , known as the King Hussein Medical City , for further treatment .
It was not immediately clear why plans were changed .
The hospital was closed to the public .
Noor was at his bedside through the morning , and relatives were paying visits , the sources said .
In Amman , a capital of 1.2 million people , streets were quiet and businesses were closed today , the Muslim holy day .
But throughout the country , Jordanians listened to the radio , watched television and scoured newspapers for clues to the king 's condition .
`` I and my family spent the night watching the news .
This is a sad moment for Jordan .
It feels like losing a father , '' said Sanaa Barakat , a 25-year -old bank clerk .
The king 's trip home came only 11 days after he abruptly left for the United States to treat the relapse of cancer .
The king 's condition `` has become critical due to the failure of the function of internal organs , '' the king 's private physician , Lt. Gen. Samir Farraj , said Thursday .
Farraj 's statement , issued at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester , Minn. , gave no further details on the king 's health .
But an official in Amman said Hussein 's body had apparently rejected a bone marrow transplant performed on Tuesday .
Another source at the royal palace , speaking on condition of anonymity , said today that the king was `` aware of everything around him and he was conscious '' when he left the Mayo Clinic on Thursday afternoon .
Hussein is the Middle East 's longest ruling leader ; he has been on the throne 46 years .
He is known as a force for moderation in the volatile region and , after Jordan 's 1994 peace with Israel , he has pushed for a broader regional peace .
Many Jordanians have known no other leader .
When Hussein suddenly flew back to the Mayo Clinic last week , Jordan 's stock market shuddered and people began buying dollars in apparent fear that the Jordanian currency might suffer .
Thursday 's announcement on the king 's condition came after business hours .
The king 's arrival today in secrecy stood in stark contrast to his homecoming Jan. 19 , when he rode through the city , cheered by tens of thousands of well-wishers , some of them firing guns in the air .
Days later , he replaced Hassan , whom he had groomed for the throne for 34 years .
He named his eldest son , Abdullah , as heir , then abruptly left for the United States .
Abdullah is an army major general , commanding an elite unit that protects the royal family .
His political views remain largely unknown , but his aides say he shares Hussein 's pro- Western outlook .
Labib Kamhawi , a political science professor at the University of Jordan , predicted the `` succession will go on smoothly with no serious mishaps '' should the king die .
