By LARRY KAPLOW AMMAN , Jordan --
King Hussein , the boy monarch who became a giant in the struggle for peace in this turbulent region , died of cancer Sunday , sending his country into profound grief and beckoning leaders from around the world to mourn him .
Hussein , 63 , had battled non- Hodgkin 's lymphoma for seven months .
He was with his family in the King Hussein Medical Center as they waited through his last hours .
He had been unconscious since before he departed cancer treatment at Minnesota 's Mayo Clinic Thursday .
For days , neither his only remaining kidney or his liver had functioned .
Finally , despite assistance from a respirator , his heart gave way , at 11 : 43 a.m .
Jordanian time .
World leaders from U.S. President Bill Clinton and former presidents Gerald Ford , Jimmy Carter and George Bush were headed to Amman Sunday night for Monday 's funeral .
British Prime Minister Tony Blair had already arrived , as had several Arab world leaders .
Through 46 years as king , Hussein had seen his country through the aftermath of the assassination of his grandfather , King Abdullah , through invasions by Syria and Yasser Arafat 's Palestine Liberation Organization , and the loss of east Jerusalem in the 1967 war with Israel .
He survived assassination attempts , and came to be hailed as an international peacemaker after signing a peace treaty with Israel in 1994 , one that embittered other Arab states and many of his own subjects .
He also had a famous personal touch , meeting many of his 4.4 million subjects personally .
Most Jordanians called Hussein `` father . ''
The announcement of his death came after an ominous reading of the Koran on Jordanian television and radio .
It set off shrieks among the 1,500 people who had been keeping a vigil outside the hospital .
Some fainted , others tied black flags to their cars .
Some chanted and still others set out on mourning marches , ghostly figures walking through the dense fog and carrying black flags .
They were a cross-section of Jordan 's diverse population -- Bedouins in red and white head scarves , Palestinians , Armenians and Circassians , non- Arabs who migrated to Jordan from Asia in the 1800s , wearing woolen round hats .
Circassians have traditionally filled the role as guards in Hussein 's palace .
Though not a guard himself , Hifem Bitar -LRB- CQ -RRB- stood vigil outside the hospital .
`` We were supposed to be protecting him and now he died right in front of us , '' he said .
As the rain soaked the city , stores closed their doors and shutters for three days of mourning .
Crown Prince Abdullah , just hours before he was sworn in as the new king , appeared on television from the office of his late father .
The 37-year -old first son was seated behind a large desk with framed photographs of Hussein and Hussein 's wife , Queen Noor , behind him .
`` May God have mercy on Hussein , the father , the brother , the commander and the man , '' Abdullah said in Arabic .
`` Hussein 's soul will remain with us and among us , and will not go away from our hearts and souls , and we shall preserve Hussein 's legacy in building and in giving , with all loyalty and sincerity , for the sake of Jordan . ''
Abdullah is an army general who few thought would be king until just a few weeks ago .
For 34 years , his uncle Hassan had been crown prince .
But , in the last surprising move of his life , Hussein removed Hassan from the job in January and put Abdullah in his place .
By nightfall , Abdullah had made his first important decree and one with a decided nod to his father 's legacy .
He appointed half-brother Prince Hamzah -- long-thought to be Hussein 's favorite son but at 18 years old too young to be king -- to be crown prince and heir to the throne .
Hamzah 's mother is Hussein 's fourth wife and widow , American -born Queen Noor .
Abdullah is considered competent but inexperienced .
Educated in the United States and England , he has a poor command of the classical form of Arabic used in public oratory .
His inexperience will be put to the test as he tries to carry on his father 's policies -- in favor of peace with Israel , wary of Iraq 's Saddam Hussein but also wary of the sanctions that have crippled the country that was once Jordan 's biggest trade partner .
Many say his greatest challenge and the greatest threat of unrest comes from Jordan 's disastrous economic condition , with unemployment about 20 percent and interest rates above 15 percent .
Just three hours after his father 's death , Abdullah strode into the Jordanian parliament wearing the traditional Bedoiun red-and-white checkered head scarf .
He paused , ramrod straight , with fists clenched behind his back and feet together , while facing a full-length portrait of his father .
The several seconds he stared at the painting seemed aimed at emphasizing what many are saying -- that Jordan is safe as long as someone from the bloodline of the Hashemite dynasty , direct descendants of the Moslem prophet Mohammad , is in charge .
`` I swear to God to uphold the constitution and be faithful to the nation , '' Abdullah said , pressing one hand on the Koran .
The five-minute ceremony was punctuated by open sobbing from spectators of the gallery .
Hassan , the spurned prince , rode with Abdullah to the parliament , but belatedly and barely joined the crowd in their applause for the new king , the fourth in Jordan 's history .
`` Stability is the first pillar of this regime , '' said Jordanian Sen. Mohammad Rasoul Kilani .
Kilani , 65 , saw Hussein 's 1953 swearing in .
He said he watched Abdullah 's coronation with `` sorrow and pain , '' because of Hussein 's death .
`` It is a feeling of love , '' he said .
`` That is the important thing , it is not that he is a ruler , it is love . ''
ENDIT
