-LRB- To publish this `` separate buy '' article , it must be purchased -- the rate is not prohibitive -- from one of these New York Times Syndicate sales representatives : -LRB- --U.S .
and Canada : DEBRA WEYDERT in New Jersey at 1-732-390-4480 ; fax , 732-390-4697 .
-LRB- --Europe and Asia : KARL HORWITZ in Paris at 47-42-17-11 ; fax , 47-42-80-44 or 47-42-18-81 ; telex , 282-942 .
-LRB- --Latin America : OLIVIA VASQUEZ in Los Angeles , 310-798-0970 ; fax , 310-798-7338 . -RRB-
By LEAH RABIN Adapted from the book `` RABIN : Our Life , His Legacy , '' by Leah Rabin , published by G.P. Putnam 's Sons , New York , 1997 .
Reprinted with permission of G.P. Putnam 's Sons .
Copyright 1999 by Leah Rabin .
-LRB- Distributed by New York Times Special Features -RRB- `` When my time comes , '' King Hussein said , `` I hope it will be like my grandfather 's -- and like Yitzhak Rabin 's .
It was November 1995 at the funeral of my husband , Yitzhak , and this was the first time since the death of his grandfather that King Hussein had set foot in Jerusalem .
His bold comment reflected the personal history of the family of the king .
In July 1951 , when he was just 16 , King Hussein saw his grandfather , King Abdullah , gunned down at the Al - Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem by an Arab assassin who feared the king was trying to make peace between the Arabs and Israel .
For my husband 's funeral , 87 heads of state had landed at Ben - Gurion Airport .
President Bill Clinton and former Presidents George Bush and Jimmy Carter also attended the funeral .
Most of the leaders wore yarmulkes , but King Hussein wore a traditional Jordanian red-checkered kaffiyeh .
So moving were the king 's words : `` My sister , Mrs. Leah Rabin , my friends , I had never thought the moment would come like this when I would grieve the loss of a brother , a colleague and a friend -- a man , a soldier whom we respected as he respected us .
`` You lived as a soldier , '' His Highness continued , `` you died as a soldier of peace , and I believe it is time for all of us to come out , openly , and to speak our piece , here today and for all the times to come ...
Let 's hope and pray that God will give us all guidance , each in his respective position , to do what he can for the better future that Yitzhak Rabin sought with determination and courage ...
After the burial service , everyone filed past us .
I shook hands , I kissed them as they came to console us , sharing our unspeakable pain .
-0- On July 25 , 1994 , a very hot and humid day , King Hussein , President Clinton and Yitzhak had signed , on the White House lawn , a declaration that ended an official state of war between Israel and Jordan .
Just before the signing ceremony , I met King Hussein and his wife , Queen Noor al- Hussein , for the first time .
I was standing beside Vice President Gore 's wife , Tipper , when the queen and I were introduced .
The Princeton -educated queen , the daughter of an American airline executive , struck me as both articulate and surprisingly down-to-earth .
-LRB- I was even more impressed when Yitzhak and I were guests of the king and queen of Jordan , and Queen Noor personally served us at the table as a special gesture of respect . -RRB-
Resolving the agreement with Jordan meant that soon Jews from all over could at long last visit Petra -- the dream of many young people who literally risked being killed just for a glimpse of the spectacular red rock formations .
I could n't wait to see it .
`` Your Majesty , are you aware how much Israelis always wanted to visit Petra ? ''
I remember saying to Queen Noor at this first meeting .
`` And , do you know how worried we are already ? '' she replied .
She was making reference to the Israeli reputation for `` storming '' tourist sites .
Months later , before the opening of an important bridge between our countries , Queen Noor sent me the most beautiful gold pin with a relief of the red rock of Petra .
King Hussein and Yitzhak addressed the U.S. Congress on July 26 .
In his speech Yitzhak noted , `` Only a 70-minute journey separates these cities , Jerusalem and Amman -- and 46 years . ''
That afternoon , Yitzhak was invited to meet King Hussein alone at his hotel .
Shortly before the meeting , an unexpected message was delivered : Would Mrs. Rabin please join us ?
Of course I came along , figuring that Yitzhak and the king would talk while the queen and I would spend time together , but I was surprised when His Majesty asked me to join the three of them .
They were to discuss the financial implications of the Israeli - Jordanian treaty .
I quickly realized that the queen was totally aware of the issues , and I was pleasantly surprised .
We spent an amiable hour together .
The Friday night after we 'd returned from our trip , we were sitting in the living room of our Tel Aviv apartment when the phone rang .
It was the king calling from his airplane , en route from Washington to London , thanking Yitzhak for his insight and his friendship .
-0- On one occasion in 1970 , at a holiday reception , I had encountered Andrew Mossbacher , chief of protocol in the U.S. Department of State .
We were at the home of a Nebraska congressman , and Mossbacher told me he was invited that night to a dinner in honor of King Hussein of Jordan .
Two months earlier , in September 1970 -- `` Black September '' -- the Jordanian army had clashed with PLO guerillas in Jordan .
Many PLO leaders -- but not Yassir Arafat -- were advocating the overthrow of King Hussein and the establishment of a Palestinian state inside Jordan .
King Hussein decided to strike back decisively .
Meanwhile Syria threatened to send tanks into Jordan , and the United States was concerned that the king 's government would fall .
The United States wanted to rally support for King Hussein .
Israel was the conduit to send a preemptive warning to Syria to keep their tanks out of Jordan , but eventually Jordan did all this by itself .
I told Mossbacher , `` Please tell King Hussein that you and I met at a cocktail party and I asked you to give him my regards , and to say that we Israelis very much admire his courage and determination in his struggle with the PLO . ''
Perhaps it would n't do any good , but it certainly could do no harm .
Very early the next morning , Mossbacher phoned to say , in his deep voice , `` Mrs .
Rabin , we all have our problems .
Perhaps King Hussein has more than we do .
You made the man happy last night .
He was so excited that , when I escorted him to his car , he repeated , ` Please do n't forget to give the Rabins my heartfelt thanks and best wishes . ' ''
-0- On the eve of the Israeli Day of Independence in May 1995 , Israeli television presented a dialogue between King Hussein and Yitzhak in Aqaba .
Before the interview , we at last visited Petra .
We were a large group , including our children , and Petra was even more magnificent than I expected .
One walks down the narrow path between sheer red rock faces .
The limestone cliffs surrounding you almost obscure the sky , their fantastic shapes rich in pinks , reds and grays .
At the end of the path is a clearing with a marvelous temple carved out of the pink limestone .
But the real excitement was to be found in what God , not man , made .
Yitzhak enjoyed the monumental scenery of Petra , but he may have savored more the implication of Israelis now being able to see Petra freely for themselves .
On June 8 , 1995 , Yitzhak appeared on Larry King 's television show on CNN , along with President Clinton , King Hussein , Shimon Peres and Yassir Arafat .
The interview reflected the rapport these men now shared .
-0- It was to be a dreadful day .
But as Yitzhak walked off the speaker 's platform at the rally of Nov. 4 , 1995 , he heard the love and blessings of hundreds of thousands of voices , young and old , too long silent , now ringing out as one , urging him forward in the name of peace .
Descending the stairs to his waiting car , I am sure his thoughts , as always , turned to the hard work of the days ahead -- to Syria and beyond .
But a nobody with a 9mm Beretta and a mind littered with hate interrupted the song of his life -- and my world , our world , was never to be the same .
-0- In the months following Yitzhak 's death , the nation paid tribute by naming many structures and facilities in his memory .
On Jan. 6 , the trauma unit of Tel Aviv 's Ichilov Hospital was renamed the Rabin Trauma Unit .
King Hussein attended ; it was his first visit to Tel Aviv .
I expressed my thanks to the whole trauma unit team , who had been by Yitzhak 's side that fateful night of Nov. 4 from the first moment he was brought there to the very last , when they realized they could do no more .
The shock had been enormous -- to have the prime minister brought in in critical condition , trying everything possible to save him , and then having to make the decision to take him off life support and declare him dead .
I should have thanked them that night in November for their efforts , but I was dazed -- I just was not thinking at all .
Finally , in a clearer moment , I expressed my gratitude for King Hussein 's presence by quoting scripture : `` Blessed be he by coming and by leaving us on his way home . ''
--
