CAIRO --
After a week that brought the death of King Hussein and the crowning of his son as successor , Jordanians are hoping that the overwhelming solidarity shown in response to their trauma will prove to be more than passing .
In the sadness prompted by the king 's death , world leaders and fellow members of the Hashemite family alike have pledged support for King Abdullah , first at Monday 's vast state funeral and then in the days of mourning that followed .
But what is important now , Jordanians and diplomats in the region say , is that those pledges be made tangible .
Jordan is now led by a 37-year -old ruler who has little experience of power , while a heavy debt burden has cast a shadow over a hoped-for economic revival , and tensions within the royal family still have the prospect to become a troublesome distraction .
`` King Abdullah is on more solid ground than his father was in 1952 , '' a former Jordanian Cabinet minister said , in a reference to the year that Hussein took power , at a time of turmoil in the Arab world .
`` But it 's certainly shaky in some respects . ''
Another former minister offered this assessment when asked about the young man who was thrust into his position as next in line to the throne only in the final weeks of his father 's life : `` He 's not incapable .
But he needs plenty of counsel and advice , and he 's also going to need some outside help . ''
By nearly every account , where Jordan is most vulnerable is in its economy , already suffering from high unemployment , low growth and facing more than $ 8 billion in debt , an amount greater than its gross domestic product .
There had been worries that nervousness over Hussein 's death could set off a crippling run on Jordan 's currency , the dinar .
For now , an American promise to speed payments of millions of dollars in economic aid to the kingdom appears to have averted that danger , said diplomats in the region .
But the diplomats say that Jordan , an important stabilizing force in the Middle East , remains in urgent need of relief -- perhaps through the rescheduling of hundreds of millions of dollars in debt owed this year to Japan and Europe , or , preferably , through forgiveness , a step embraced by the United States in 1994 , when it wiped away $ 700 million in Jordanian debt .
Another hope that has been rekindled in Jordan is the prospect that Saudi Arabia or Kuwait might revive old generosities .
Before the Persian Gulf War of 1991 , those countries provided both aid and employment to Jordan , but both streams were all but eliminated as punishment for Hussein 's tilt to Iraq .
At the time of the funeral and afterward , Saudi and Kuwaiti leaders have spoken of Jordan with fresh warmth .
Diplomats in the region are watching closely to see if those remarks translate into any fresh sharing of wealth , although the Persian Gulf states may be less giving now because of depressed oil prices and their own economic troubles .
A more distant but no less troublesome challenge for Jordan could come in relations with the Palestinians .
On Friday , the Palestinian leader , Yasser Arafat , in a surprise move , offered what he portrayed as a goodwill gesture to Abdullah , saying that the Palestinians would welcome a future confederation with Jordan .
Such an arrangement could bring economic benefits , but it might also carry political problems for Jordan , whose population already includes a large Palestinian majority .
If a confederation were forged , Jordanians would become a much smaller minority , something that could add to the prospect of internal instability .
In Jordan itself , what many citizens have been watching most intently is a drama unfolding in the royal family , which is still recovering from the shock of Hussein 's decision last month to dismiss his brother , Hassan , as crown prince , and to replace him with Abdullah , Hussein 's eldest son , who became king last Sunday .
It was very much noticed that Prince Hassan did not join Abdullah on Tuesday in receiving mourners on the day after the state funeral , and that when he did appear in public , he did not wear a kaffiyeh , the traditional sign of mourning that was worn all week by Abdullah and Hussein 's other four sons .
The next day , Hassan did stand shoulder-to-shoulder with the new king , and he pledged in a public letter to his nephew , `` I will not hold back love , or knowledge or support . ''
In a separate show of unity , Hussein 's widow , Queen Noor , received female mourners alongside not only Princess Rania , Abdullah 's wife , but also Princess Muna , the king 's British -born mother , whom Hussein divorced in 1971 .
But associates of Hassan say he remains bitter at his removal just two weeks before he himself would have become king , and at a lack of sympathy shown by the Jordanian people , many of whom turned against him after his dismissal .
And as evidence of trouble within the family , Jordanians close to the royal court pointed out that neither Hassan 's wife , Princess Sarvath , nor their three daughters had joined other members of the royal family at Hussein 's bedside as the monarch lay dying .
Linking Jordan 's personal and practical problems is the fact that Hassan had come to be seen by many Jordanians and foreign investors as a figure capable of putting Jordan 's economy on firmer footing .
There remain rumors that Hassan , 51 , might leave the country , as his father , King Talal , did in 1952 after being forced to cede the throne to Hussein .
His associates say that is unlikely ; they say he feels no animosity toward either Abdullah or the crown prince , Hamzah , 18 , who is Queen Noor 's eldest son , and feels bound to Jordan by duty and family ties .
But they say he is having a difficult time adjusting to the idea of playing a peripheral role in a country he served for 34 years as the king 's closest adviser and confidant .
During his reign , Hussein installed a new prime minister on the average of once every 11 months , and diplomats say they expect Abdullah to move soon to install his own prime minister , as a sign that a new era has begun .
But such a move is not likely , they say , until after a 40-day mourning period ends , in mid- March .
