AMMAN , Jordan --
In the days before the cancer finally consumed him and he was rushed home , King Hussein played chess with his son Hamzah .
The cancer-stricken monarch spent hours early last week sitting up in his hospital bed in Minnesota 's Mayo Clinic , staring at the chessboard and focusing on each move .
Palace sources say it was cherished time with his 18-year -old son , and it took the king 's mind off the pain .
It seemed a poignant closing image for the king 's life : A dying patriarch was using the chessboard to pass on the wisdom and the sense of strategy that the next generation will need to lead this pivotal Middle East nation .
Crown Prince Abdullah , who was sworn in Saturday as regent of the kingdom , hopes he has learned those lessons from his father .
`` I hope that I can live up to His Majesty 's dignity and virtue that he has had with his people .
I think that this is the secret of ruling Jordan , '' the newly designated heir said in his first interview with American reporters on Thursday .
`` I am just an extension of His Majesty 's policies , '' he said .
Some palace watchers say the chess metaphor may also be an apt one for a man who , in the end of his life , so dramatically maneuvered the pawns , knights and queens of his own family .
Now that Jordan 's Hashemite dynasty must prepare to lay down its king , questions have begun to swirl over what the succession will mean for the palace , for Jordan , and for the region .
In his interview , Abdullah stressed that he would continue to `` honor '' Jordan 's peace agreements with Israel despite Jordanians ' rising impatience with the failure of the economic benefits of peace to materialize .
He recognized the need to focus on Jordan 's economy , which has remained stagnant for two years , and which already suffered a ripple of anxiety Saturday with a drop in the value of the Jordanian currency .
As the king 's death appears imminent , according to his doctors , the next few days will undoubtedly `` bind the family together in sorrow , '' said Fahed Fanek , a columnist .
A palace official said of the family : `` They are very unified in their sorrow .
All of the divisions wash away in the face of the tragedy . ''
But in the following months , royal watchers predict that the royal family dynamics will play out for the ascendant Crown Prince Abdullah , the deposed Crown Prince Hassan , the US -born Queen Noor , and her oldest son and the king 's favored successor , Hamzah .
As Abdullah himself put it , `` The future of the Hashemites , the future of Jordan , are intertwined . ''
Last month , the king chose Abdullah , his oldest son by his second wife , to succeed him .
But most palace watchers believe the king would have preferred Hamzah , his oldest son by his fourth wife , Queen Noor , as successor .
The king simply did not have enough time or strength at the end of his life to make the constitutional changes that would have been required for Hamzah to take over .
And the king came to realize that Hamzah , at age 18 , was too young , palace sources said .
A looming question is whether Abdullah will follow tradition and keep his first-born son , now 3 years old , to be crown prince .
Or , will he , as his father did for 34 years , appoint a brother , in this case his half-brother Hamzah , to be crown prince ?
Article 28 of Jordan 's consitution allows him that right , if Parliament approves .
For now , Hamzah will finish his studies at Britain 's Sandhurst military academy and is expected to become crown prince under Abdullah .
The passing of the crown to Abdullah is not considered likely to mean an end to the reign of Queen Noor .
Formerly known as Lisa Halaby , the American -born and Princeton -educated queen became a symbol throughout the world for her grace and beauty and her commitment to causes such as ridding the world of land mines .
She has mingled easily with the world 's glitterati , and is not expected to exit from the limelight .
The Hashemites may well leave Noor her title .
And then the question will be : Is Jordan big enough for two queens ?
Abdullah 's wife would presumably also be crowned queen , palace watchers say .
If so , for the first time in Jordan 's history , a Hashemite queen will be of Palestinian descent .
Princess Rania , the striking and sophisticated wife of Abdullah , will be a new face for the world , and the pride of Jordan 's large Palestinian population .
Her role would be symbolic , but important politically in the delicate relationship between the Palestinians and Jordan .
Prince Hassan 's fate is perhaps the most uncertain .
For more than 30 years , the erudite 51-year -old brother of Hussein was the heir to the throne , until the king 's dramatic announcement that he was changing his succession .
That announcement followed a tumultuous week of palace intrigue last month that resulted in Hussein writing an uncharacterisically scathing letter to his brother explaining why he would not be king .
Hassan was so deeply affected by the decision that he , according to the Arab newspaper El Bayan , handed the king a pistol and said , `` Shoot me if I have betrayed you . ''
The king will leave behind a palace -- of two brothers and 12 children by four wives -- struggling to regain stability after a single monarch 's rule for nearly a half century .
`` Everything has happened so fast , there has not been time for factions to develop within the family , '' said one former palace official .
`` But they will have to be careful not to allow all of the forces vying for power to disrupt the unity of the family .
That could easily destabilize the kingdom . ''
`` But I think they are aware of what is at stake , '' he added .
`` I think His Majesty made sure they were . ''
