By LARRY KAPLOW AMMAN , Jordan --
In the end , King Hussein of Jordan died with his royal family around him , in a hospital that bears his name , in the country he protected and in the war-torn region where he dared to work for peace .
It was easy to understand why many Jordanians wept , fainted and seemed in shock of a death that had come from a long , sadly predictable bout with cancer .
He was in their eyes , the man that sheltered them from the turbulent Middle East , gave them cars and scholarships , and advised them like a father .
The world , meanwhile , had watched Hussein grow from an underestimated boy-monarch into a tireless international peacemaker and keystone of regional stability .
Cancer of the lymph glands finally did what wars , invasions and assassins could not do , felling Hussein after nearly a half-century in power .
He was 63 years old and the longest ruling , hands-on leader in the world .
Hussein bin -LRB- CQ -RRB- Talal was adventurous and charismatic .
He rode motorcycles and piloted airplanes -- including the one that brought him , ill and gaunt , back to Jordan in January after prolonged cancer treatment at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester , Minn .
He assumed the throne at the age of 17 , a year after his grandfather , King Abdullah , was gunned down by his side , but several years before he effectively held power .
With a mix of ego and craft , the diminutive king overcame a playboy reputation to survive coup and assassination attempts , and foreign invasions .
At times , he brutally quelled street demonstrations and jailed critics .
But he solidified a weak , fragmented nation in the center of a constantly shifting region .
By holding the tiny country together , allying it with the west and leading it to a peace treaty with Israel , Hussein made Jordan a calming influence and mediator for the oft-restless region .
Short on natural resources , he made his country into a valuable buffer state : Israel supports Jordan because it distances them from less friendly Arab states and the Arab states support Jordan because it separates them from the Israelis .
Hussein met with nine American presidents -- from Dwight Eisenhower to Bill Clinton .
In Jordan , his subjects called him `` father . ''
They hung his picture in their homes and stores and listened to songs extolling his virtues .
He helped enhance his natural charisma with unconfirmed stories of narrow escapes and daring .
His grace and ability to reach down and touch the lives of his subjects , individually , were undeniable .
In his final days , his subjects reminisced about the old-school way he answered requests for money for specialized hospital treatment or gave cars to the disabled .
They even told stories , like the time Hussein stopped to help change a man 's tire or helped motorists in a freak 1992 snow storm .
His public humility extended to his most celebrated achievement , the peace treaty with Israel .
After a Jordanian soldier shot dead seven Israeli girls in 1997 , the King went to Israel to kneel with their parents , in their homes , in mourning -- over the objections of many Jordanians .
He made the visit to shore up the 1994 peace treaty with Israel .
The treaty came after 47 years of periodic warfare and was Hussein 's greatest international achievement .
But it remains unfinished business .
The treaty is highly unpopular with Jordanians , who think Hussein should have driven a harder bargain -- and who have become embittered as the Israeli - Palestinian peace process has foundered .
He left his sickbed at Clinton 's urging in October to coax along the deadlocked Wye River Plantation peace talks .
Frail and hairless from his radiation therapy , he offered hope by lending the weight of his authority to the negotiations .
Striding into a large dining room late one evening , his striking American -raised Queen Noor at his side , Hussein implored the parties to imagine peace for the sake of their children and , Clinton said , proffered `` stern instructions at the appropriate times , '' to help push negotiators the last few inches toward the diplomatic goal line .
`` There has been enough destruction .
Enough death .
Enough waste , '' Hussein said at the agreement 's signing ceremony .
`` It 's time that , together , we occupy a place beyond ourselves , our people , that is worthy of them under the sun , the descendants of the children of Abraham . ''
The peace process has stalled again since that speech .
But , after holding office for nearly half a century , Hussein 's other achievements are clear .
Always his top priority , Hussein held Jordan together and preserved his Hashemite dynasty -- the last ruling family among the direct descendants of the Moslem prophet Mohammed 42 generations before Hussein .
The Hashemite family traces back to Saudi Arabia .
Hussein was born in Amman , Nov. 14 , 1935 , but his family 's outsider status helped him be a calculating and successful broker in a country that was cobbled together among Palestinians , Beduins and native tribes that vied for power .
In the region , the country separates the Arabs and the Israelis , literally located between the defensive Jewish state on the west and restless Iraq on the east .
But , regional leaders previously held other designs on Jordan .
Through the 1960s , Egyptian president Gamel Abdel Nasser tried to rally Jordanians against Hussein .
Syrian troops and Yasser Arafat 's Palestine Liberation Organization moved in and tried to occupy parts of Jordan until Hussein 's army expelled them in a bloody 1970 campaign .
Israelis shored up his effort by threatening to push the Syrians out themselves .
Despite it all , Hussein ushered Jordan into modernity .
The country scarcely had paved roads in its capital when he was a child .
Friends recall him sneaking away from his security guards to go hunting in what is now an posh hotel district .
The country is still poor and its economy a near shambles -- something Jordanians say Hussein gave too little attention .
But , per capita income , according to a Jordanian economist , has risen from about $ 150 in 1952 to about $ 1,650 today .
Life expectancy rose from 46 years to 69 years in the same period .
Jordan 's population is nine times what it was when Hussein took over , now about 4.4 million .
More than half of the population are Palestinians , who have been folded into Jordanian society after their displacement from Israel .
`` The legacy he will leave is that he built Jordan out of almost nothing , '' said childhood friend and former Jordanian Foreign Minister Marwan Qassam -LRB- CQ -RRB- .
Hussein has had famous failures , as well , and there is no question about the biggest .
In 1967 , Egypt 's Nasser convinced him to side with the Arabs in a war against Israel .
The Arab armies were routed in six days and Jordan lost the holy sites of east Jerusalem , as well as the economically fertile region on the West bank of the Jordan River .
`` He saw in 1967 that war is not a solution .
Opting for peace was the only course to pursue , '' Qassam said .
Journalist Sultan Al - Hattab said that once on an airplane trip in 1990 , Hussein gazed out the window and told him , `` Jerusalem was lost while I was king .
I would like to see it , if only for one day before I die , not under -LRB- Israeli -RRB- occupation . ''
Hussein , with close ties to the CIA and western leaders , steered Jordan firmly into the anti- Communist camp of the Cold War .
But , when the Cold War ended , his choices were less clear and he faltered .
In 1990 , Hussein angered his American allies and lost the support of crucial Arab aid donors by refusing to condemn Iraq 's Saddam Hussein for his invasion of neighboring Kuwait .
The rift illustrated the fine line along which Hussein lead his country .
Iraq was Jordan 's biggest trade partner , supplier of oil and viewed as a necessary ally .
But , years after the Gulf War and with Saddam weakened , King Hussein 's army would take to the streets and attack protesters that denounced the follow-up U.S. military strikes on Iraq .
While far less repressive than many other Arab states , Jordan is still far from being a democratic state .
Moreover , Hussein had advocated laws restricting the media .
Dependent on foreign aid -- including $ 225 million a year from the United States -- the country has few resources and is deep in debt .
But Jordan survives , and the candle of regional peace still flickers , because Hussein convinced its neighbors , from Israel to Syria , that they benefit from the calming buffer .
-LRB- EDs : Optional trim begins here . -RRB-
Carving that role was what drove Hussein from the beginning .
At the core of this survival story was the monarchy , the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan , which has survived assassinations , displacement and mental illness .
Hussein 's grandfather Abdullah allied his tribes with the British in fighting the Ottoman empire out of the Middle East in 1918 .
Largely as a reward , Winston Churchill agreed in 1922 to let him rule the area then known as Transjordan .
King Abdullah went to Jerusalem in 1951 , for what may have been secret negotiations with Israel .
He took his grandson Hussein and , as they entered the Al - Aqsa Mosque , Islam 's third most holy site , a Palestinian shot the King dead .
Hussein 's father Talal became king .
But , he showed signs of schizophrenia and was removed from office .
After intrigue and attempts by foreign countries to place their surrogates on the throne , it went to the 17-year -old Hussein , then studying in England .
`` His grandfather saw in him much more than he saw in his own sons , '' said friend Qassam .
`` -LRB- Hussein -RRB- was on a mission . ''
Already with a flare for self-aggrandizement , Hussein took a tour of the country before attending the Royal Military Academy in England .
-LRB- EDs : Optional trim ends here . -RRB-
In one of his first strokes of power , at the age of 21 , Hussein replaced with Jordanians the British post-colonial leadership of Jordan 's `` Arab Legion . ''
His personal life was as turbulent as his political life .
He married his first wife , Hashemite Dina Hamed , in 1953 .
She was seven years older than the 18-year -old King .
They had a daughter , but he divorced Hamed after 18 months and kept custody of their daughter .
Hussein would marry three more times and have a total of 11 children .
He divorced two wives and another , Queen Alia , died in a helicopter crash .
Hussein left behind his wife of 20 years , Queen Noor , the daughter of a leading U.S. aviation official .
She is an American architect of Arab descent .
She was named Lisa Halaby until she married the king and , converted to Islam and became Noor Al - Hussein , or `` Light of Hussein . ''
The king met her while she was helping design an aviation college in Jordan .
He courted her with palace dinners and rides on his motorcycle .
The tall blonde and the short , macho monarch , received a modicum of notoriety in the jet-set , vacationing in palaces in London and Vienna .
Rumors of Hussein 's infidelities swirled around his marriages .
Many said the union with Noor was in trouble until 1992 .
That year , Hussein , founder of hospitals and an avid reader of medical journals , began having serious medical problems .
His left kidney and part of his intestine were removed after he was found to have cancer .
His return to health brought dancing and weeping Jordanians into the streets .
He would risk that popularity , however , to make the most controversial move of his life .
Hussein had long held secret meetings with Israeli officials .
After the 1993 Oslo Accords appeared to put Israel and the Palestinians on the path to peace , Hussein took Jordan into a treaty with Israel .
Again , the issue for him was survival .
`` He thought the survival of Jordan is best served by the peace with Israel , '' said Fahed Fanek , a Jordanian political analyst .
The peace with Israel brought the tiny desert kingdom international aid and recognition , but the gap between Jordan 's rich and poor have grown and most Jordanians feel they have not seen the fruits of Hussein 's peace .
In 1995 , Hussein made his first visit to Jerusalem since the 1967 war to speak in eulogy of assassinated Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin .
`` Let 's not keep silent , '' he said .
`` Let our voices rise high to speak of our commitment to peace for all times to come , and let us tell those who live in darkness , who are the enemies of light . . . this is where we stand . ''
In July 1998 , fevers and fatigue were the symptoms of cancer again , this time lymphoma .
He spent six months in radiation treatment at the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota -- the longest time he had ever spent away from his kingdom as king .
Her returned home in January .
Despite rains and a windy January chill , hundreds of thousands of Jordanians came to meet him .
Buoyed by their affection and again with a flare for drama , Hussein soaked himself by riding the streets with his head poking up from the sun-roof of his cream-colored Mercedes - Benz .
While in Amman , the man known for closely holding his deliberations , made his last surprising move .
He removed his brother , Prince Hassan , from the post of crown prince , which he had held for 34 years .
Hussein substituted his first son , 37-year -old army general Abdullah , as heir to the throne .
In a letter to Hassan , he spoke of `` parasites '' and `` climbers '' spoiling the atmosphere in the palace and slandering his family .
Some observers thought the sick king , traumatized by his own mortality , had misinterpreted logical moves by Hassan as challenges to his authority .
Hussein may have wanted to place his favorite son , Hamzah , in line for the throne , but the prince was only 18 years old and the king was more ill than his country knew .
Hours before being rushed back to Minnesota , he appointed Abdullah to be heir .
Hours after being sworn in as king Sunday , Abdullah , in turn , appointed Hamzah as his crown prince .
Though Hussein 's death still shocked his little nation , for months he and the country had been pondering his mortality .
Hussein addressed it in an interview in July , when his latest sickness began .
`` There is life and there is an end to life , '' he said .
`` That is the way with everyone who has preceded us in this world , great people , normal people , every human being . ''
ENDIT
