AMMAN , Jordan --
Piloting his own plane , King Hussein of Jordan returned to his kingdom on Tuesday after six months of cancer treatment .
His arrival prompted scenes of widespread jubilation , but also speculation about who might next take the reins of the country he has governed for nearly half a century .
The 63-year -old king has promised only `` a comprehensive review '' of Jordan 's course .
But senior officials said on Tuesday that he was contemplating succession by one of his five sons rather than by his long-designated successor , his brother , Crown Prince Hassan , who has ruled the country during his long absence .
Never before during his reign has Hussein been away from Jordan for so long .
He was welcomed home on Tuesday by hundreds of thousands of Jordanians , who braved unseasonably chilly , rainy weather to pay tribute to a king who has been the only leader the vast majority of them have ever known .
After landing his jet at a military airport on Tuesday , during the Id al- Fitr holiday marking the end of the Islamic holy month of Ramadan , the king , gaunt and hairless from his cancer therapy , knelt on a prayer rug to give thanks .
Before his return , the king had fueled much talk here that he might be reconsidering a succession plan that for more than 30 years had put his brother next in line for the throne .
He has kept people guessing with comments like , `` No one knows what is in the mind of Hussein until it crystallizes into a reality . ''
On Tuesday , the king praised Hassan for serving as his `` deputy , '' but gave no clue about his intentions .
A senior palace official said , though , that the king 's `` difficult days of life and death '' during his treatment had `` naturally rekindled a wish to seek posterity through passing the succession to one of his sons . ''
Only once before , in 1992 , after treatment for an earlier bout with cancer , had the king 's return from abroad prompted the kind of rejoicing that burst forth on Tuesday .
Fireworks exploded over Amman , and streets were decorated with pennants and banners and crowded with hundreds of thousands of people .
Dancers from around the kingdom joined in what by any measure was a most extraordinary pageant .
Hussein has ruled Jordan since 1952 -- when Harry S. Truman was president -- and there is no doubt that he has been sorely missed .
`` Thank God he has returned , '' Amira al- Awahdi , a 42-year -old homemaker , said on Tuesday afternoon as she took part in the celebration .
`` I ca n't imagine what we will ever do without him . ''
Jordan , with its 4 million people , has a strategic location , sandwiched between Syria , Iraq , Saudi Arabia and Israel .
In the last five years , Jordan has reached out to Israel , joining Egypt as the only two Arab countries to make peace with Israel .
But it has never fully forsworn its ties with Iraq -- on which it still depends for oil -- and that prompts distrust in Egypt , Saudi Arabia and other Arab countries that joined the United States in waging war against Iraq in 1991 after it invaded Kuwait .
This has left Jordan a bit lonely , despite Hussein 's efforts to bridge gaps through his charm and diplomacy .
The king took time out from his treatment at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester , Minn. , to join President Clinton last October for Middle East peace talks at the Wye Plantation in Maryland .
Then , as happened several times in the past , he was credited with helping to bridge the gap between Israeli and Palestinian leaders .
In his absence , the country was led by Hassan , the king 's understudy for more than 33 years , who is seen both at home and abroad as a competent and effective leader .
But still , at 52 , Hassan seems to lack the common touch that might be necessary to guide Jordan though what many expect will be tumultuous years ahead .
For years , Jordan had depended for much of its revenue on trade with Iraq , most of which was halted under the U.N. sanctions that stemmed from Iraq 's invasion of Kuwait in 1990 .
More than half of Jordan 's people are Palestinians whose homeland is the West Bank , but for whom returning there has become an increasingly distant prospect .
Jordan has yet to reap clear dividends from its accord with Israel in 1994 , which remains deeply unpopular among many Jordanians .
In the years since , the economy has suffered and unemployment has soared .
In the days preceding his return , Hussein had seemed intent on pre-empting his critics .
In a televised address from London over the weekend , he declared that there was `` no choice but to engage soon in a comprehensive review of our national course and dealing with all the issues and challenges that occupy our minds or obstruct our blessed path . ''
Jordanian officials have interpreted that statement as a signal that the king may be reconsidering the succession .
For many Jordanians , that kind of speculation was fueled again on Tuesday when the king , in a statement on his arrival , made no more than passing reference to his brother .
Many people in Jordan believe that he would prefer to be succeeded by one of his five sons from his four marriages .
The one most often mentioned is Prince Hamzeh , 18 , the king 's eldest son by his current wife , the American -born Queen Noor .
As his father was , Prince Hamzeh is being educated at the British military academy at Sandhurst .
His eloquence in Arabic and English has been widely admired in Jordan , and he has been at the king 's side through most of his illness .
The speculation was fed on Tuesday by the very public presence of Queen Noor at the king 's side as the royal party rolled through the streets of Amman in a 1960s Mercedes - Benz limousine .
Even in Jordan , which has a more relaxed attitude toward public roles for women than most Arab countries , it is unusual that the wife of a leader would be presented so prominently .
The king has pronounced himself `` fully recovered '' from his lymphoma .
Since July he has undergone six courses of chemotherapy , which he has acknowledged left him physically and emotionally weakened , and Tuesday he appeared a bit frail .
But throughout his illness , the king has appeared determined to display his physical vigor , most often by taking control of his aircraft , as he did Tuesday by flying his Gulfstream jet here from London , where he had been recovering in a holiday home .
