AMMAN , March 22 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Jordanian Queen Noor al- Hussein , widow of late King Hussein , Monday promised continued support to the new Queen Rania and her husband King Abdullah Bin Hussein .
Noor made the pledge when she was seen off by Rania and other royal family members at the Amman International Airport for a brief visit to the United States , the official news agency Petra reported .
Rania al- Abdullah was named as queen Sunday night by her husband King Abdullah , who described her as `` my partner '' in serving the kingdom and Arabs in a designation letter read on state television Jordan TV .
A coronation ceremony is due to be held after a three-month mourning period for late King Hussein which is to end on May 7 .
Hussein died of cancer on February 7 .
Rania was born in 1970 to the wealthy Yassin family which had a root in the Palestinian town of Tulkarem in the West Bank .
Her marriage to Abdullah made him extremely popular in the predominant Palestinian population of desert kingdom even before he became the new ruler .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Jordanian officials said Rania 's designation will have little bearing on the status of Noor , who had held the title of queen since her marriage in 1978 .
Jordan 's constitution allows for more than one queen , and Noor had shared the title with Hussein 's mother Zein until her death in 1994</ENAMEX> .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Noor was also assured of a role in Jordan 's state affairs as she is the mother of Crown Prince Hamza Bin Hussein , whom Abdullah named as crown prince .</ENAMEX>
Noor had been a helping hand to Hussein to break the isolation Jordan had suffered for its sympathy with Iraq following its invasion of Kuwait in 1990 .
The America -born Noor also helped Jordan develop close ties with the United States , which has become the largest donor of the kingdom .
Washington has promised some 300 million dollars of military and financial aid to Jordan in 1999 , making the kingdom the largest recipient of U.S. aid in the world on per capita basis .
