BEIJING
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
In its first public defense policy review in three years , China renewed a threat Monday to retake Taiwan by force , criticized nuclear tests by India and Pakistan and hinted that the United States is a potential menace to security .
The State Council , or Cabinet , in issuing the review Monday reiterated that China wants a stable world order to pursue its primary goal of economic development .
It vowed never to attack or invade unless first attacked .
Although it noted an overall easing of tensions worldwide , the State Council said threats persist .
Without naming names , the policy review assailed `` hegemonism '' -- a euphemism for the United States and its superpower status -- and the U.S. alliance with Japan .
`` Hegemonism and power politics remain the main source of threats to world peace and stability , '' the policy paper said .
`` Some countries , by relying on their military advantages , pose military threats to other countries , even resorting to armed intervention . ''
The policy review criticized , again without specifying , the U.S. - Japan security treaty as `` an infringement upon and interference in China 's sovereignty . ''
Renewed treaty guidelines issued last year drew Beijing 's anger after a Japanese politician suggested that the pact covered potential conflicts over Taiwan .
China is sensitive about activities that undermine its claim to Taiwan as a renegade province .
Japan ruled the island for 50 years until its defeat in World War II and the United States backed the island through much of the Cold War and continues to sell it arms over Beijing 's objections .
In keeping with China 's usually prickly statements on Taiwan , the State Council renewed a pledge to seek peaceful unification with the island but added that Beijing `` will not commit itself not to resort to force . ''
While taking issue with India and Pakistan for conducting nuclear tests , the State Council singled out Delhi for harsher treatment , criticizing it for `` flagrantly '' defying the international community .
Pakistan is a decades -old ally .
If largely a recitation of long-held and oft-repeated positions , China 's first published defense policy review since 1995 was notable for bringing a modicum of transparency to the largely secretive workings of the world 's largest standing army .
Defense officials from the United States and other countries have urged China to publish more information about the People 's Liberation Army more often to dispel suspicions about Chinese intentions .
The policy paper provided some details on a plan to trim the PLA by 500,000 to 2.5 million members .
Overall the army will shrink 19 percent , the navy 11.6 percent and the air force 11 percent , the paper said .
It also released figures on conventional weapons imports and exports registered with the United Nations between 1992 and 1996 .
The figures show , for example , China imported 48 aircraft and two naval vessels , but the report does not provide details on the purchases .
Offsetting the small steps toward openness , the report does little to open the accounts of the PLA .
The review noted that last year 's defense budget of 81.3 billion -LRB- dlrs 9.8 billion -RRB- amounted to less than 4 percent of what the U.S. spends .
It explained that the budget covers everything from salaries and clothing to research and procurement .
Foreign military analysts have for years disputed the published figure as ridiculously low given the PLA 's sustained foreign buying spree and missile-development program .
Taiwan 's Defense Ministry noted in March that China was spending at least three times the acknowledged amount on defense .
