TAIPEI , Taiwan
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
As Chinese President Jiang Zemin prepares for an unprecedented state visit to Japan , Taiwanese are nervously wondering whether Tokyo will drop its support for the island in exchange for better ties to the mainland , the deputy foreign minister said Monday .
`` We understand and respect the reasons behind Jiang 's visit , but we hope that during the visit , Japan will not trade away , sacrifice or backtrack on Taiwan 's interests , '' David Lee told reporters .
Taiwan is doing all it can -- mobilizing its contacts in Japanese political , media and academic circles to remind Tokyo of its past commitments to the island , Lee said .
So far , Japanese support seems to be holding , he said .
Taiwan 's media have been awash with speculation over whether Japan will make a pledge to the Chinese president over Taiwan similar to that offered by U.S. President Bill Clinton during his visit to China in the summer .
Clinton pledged not to recognize Taiwan 's independence , support Taiwan 's entry into the United Nations or formally recognize the political split between Taiwan and China .
Clinton 's words were viewed as a major encouragement to China in its claims of sovereignty over Taiwan .
Jiang is to embark Wednesday on the first ever state visit to Japan by a Chinese head of state .
Taiwan is expected to be a key topic of discussion .
China and Taiwan divided in 1949 , when Mao Tse -tung 's Communists forced Chiang Kai -shek 's Nationalists to flee to the island amid civil war .
Their current governments are heirs to that struggle , and Beijing continues to claim Taiwan as a breakaway province to be reunited with the mainland by force if necessary .
Jiang is expected to discuss regional security issues and may be offered a formal apology from Japan for its invasion and brutal World War II occupation of China , Lee said .
While Taiwan supports such an act of contrition , Lee said China 's Communist rulers have no right to make such a demand because the Nationalists were China 's wartime government and led the fight against the Japanese .
`` We feel Japan should apologize to the Chinese people ... but we do n't feel Japan should apologize to the Chinese Communist political authority , '' he added .
Lee told members of the Taipei Foreign Correspondents Club about continuing cultural ties between Taiwan and Japan , which ruled the island as its colony between 1895 and 1945 .
He also said that China 's 1995-96 military exercises aimed at dampening support for Taiwan independence had led to discussion about Taiwan 's possible inclusion in a regional anti-missile defense network .
China considers Taiwan 's inclusion in the proposed Theater Missile Defense plan involving Japan and the United States as interference in its domestic affairs .
`` China ought to know .
If you had n't committed such provocative military actions ... then it 's likely that Japan and the United States would still be discussing trade subjects only , '' Lee said .
