<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">TOKYO
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Japan 's coast guard on Wednesday tried to block a small flotilla of boats that were carrying Chinese nationalists to a chain of islands at the center of a territorial dispute .</ENAMEX>
While the six ships from Taiwan and Hong Kong heeded warnings to stop from Japanese patrol boats , four activists clambered onto a rubber dingy and sped on toward the islands , a coast guard official said .
The coast guard dispatched more than 30 cutters and other ships to intercept the activists , said Yusuke Ono , a spokesman for Japan 's Maritime Safety Agency .
It also erected a rope fence to prevent them from landing , he said .
Most of the activists turned back after briefly entering Japanese waters about 22 kilometers -LRB- 14 miles -RRB- southwest of the disputed archipelago , known as the Senkaku in Japan but the Diaoyu by Chinese speakers .
The uninhabited , rocky islets lie midway between Taiwan and Japan 's southern island of Okinawa .
They are administered by Japan but claimed by China and Taiwan .
Ono said Japanese coast guard ships were pursuing the dingy , blaring warnings to turn back .
He said Japanese ships may try to block or encircle the tiny boat .
The dingy was launched from a ship carrying 25 protesters from Hong Kong , Japanese news reports said .
The other five vessels were Taiwanese and likely left the northern Taiwanese port of Keelung on Tuesday night , Ono said .
While he did n't know how many people were on board the boats , news reports here said about 25 people left Taiwan , including local politicians .
Ethnic Chinese nationalists from Hong Kong and Taiwan have tried repeatedly in the past to land on the islands to protest Japanese control .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">In a heated confrontation in May of last year , Japanese coast guard ships blocked , nudged and collided with a fleet of 28 boats carrying Hong Kong and Taiwan protesters who wanted to land on the islands and tear down a lighthouse and markers put up by Japanese nationalists .</ENAMEX>
The confrontation followed a visit to the islands by a Japanese right-wing lawmaker that incited a surge of nationalism in Hong Kong and Taiwan , where many still carry bitter anti- Japanese memories .
Japan occupied Hong Kong during World War II and colonized Taiwan for 50 years until 1945 .
In 1996 , a Hong Kong activist drowned after jumping into waters near the islands from one of several protest boats that had come from Taiwan and Hong Kong .
The last attempt to reach the islands by Chinese nationalists was in September 1997 , when rough seas forced a vessel from Hong Kong carrying eight protesters to turn back .
