BEIJING
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">China said Thursday that Japan `` should be held responsible '' for damaging a ship that was carrying Hong Kong residents protesting Tokyo 's control over disputed islands </ENAMEX>.
Foreign Ministry spokesman Tang Guoqiang said China had warned Japan not to intensify the conflict over the Diaoyu Islands , which are claimed by both countries .
`<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">` It is regrettable that Japanese authorities sent many ships and that one hit and sank a ship .</ENAMEX>
China is very concerned .
Japan should be held responsible , '' Tang said in a regular news briefing .
Japan 's coast guard said , however , the ship still was drifting in the area of the islands , watched by a Japanese patrol boat .
It was in no immediate danger of sinking , and had not been damaged along its waterline when hit by a patrol boat escorting it out of Japanese waters , the agency said .
It had reported earlier that the 100-ton trawler , one of six vessels from Taiwan and Hong Kong , was abandoned Wednesday after its occupants reported a leak .
On Thursday , it said in a statement that Japanese officials searched the ship and found the leak was in rubber tubing in the engine 's cooling system .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">It was impossible to believe this damage had been caused by a bump from a Japanese ship , the agency said .</ENAMEX>
It said , however , that in the escort action , the Hong Kong ship suffered holes , each smaller than two square meters -LRB- 20 square feet -RRB- , in structures above the deck .
All but one of the 25 activists and crew members from the trawler Diaoyutai went aboard other ships from Taiwan .
A Japanese patrol boat picked up the remaining one .
The activists flew back to Hong Kong Thursday .
Albert Ho , the expedition 's leader , said Japan attacked them `` in the most reckless and unscrupulous manner . ''
He called on Taiwan and China to negotiate with Japan .
The protesters were making the latest in a series of efforts to land on the uninhabited , Japanese -controlled islands -- known as Diaoyu in Chinese and Senkaku in Japanese -- to dramatize claims to them by China and Taiwan .
Japanese authorities declined to say how many Japanese patrol boats were keeping watch around the islands , about 220 kilometers -LRB- 136 miles -RRB- northeast of Taipei in the East China Sea .
Kyodo News agency said about 50 were in the area .
Two years ago , a Hong Kong activist jumped overboard and drowned on a similar expedition when Japanese coast guard vessels kept him from landing on the islands .
On a later protest expedition , several activists from Taiwan and Hong Kong succeeded in planting a flag briefly on one of the islands .
