HONG KONG
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
A group of Hong Kong activists set out in a trawler Sunday to join a protest armada to challenge Japanese control over an uninhabited island group in the East China Sea .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">With their boat bedecked with flags reading `` Chinese territory , Diaoyu Islands , '' and `` Down with Japanese militarism , '' the 25 activists were seen off with cheers by families and well-wishers .
The Diaoyu , known in Japanese as the Senkaku , are controlled by Japan but claimed by both Taiwan and China .</ENAMEX>
Hong Kong returned to Chinese rule last July .
`` Every Chinese has the responsibility to fight for what belongs to us , '' said Zhang Likun , a mainland Chinese worker , on board the 10-ton Diaoyu Tai boat .
The group plans to plant a Chinese flag on one of the islands to protest Japan 's claim , expedition leader Albert Ho said .
Ho said they wanted to show `` the determination of the Chinese people that we continue to protest against the Japanese ... for their persistent refusal to confess all crimes committed against the Chinese people . ''
Two years ago , a Hong Kong activist jumped overboard and drowned on a similar expedition when Japanese coast guard vessels prevented him from landing on the islands .
On a later protest expedition , several activists from Taiwan and Hong Kong succeeded in planting a flag briefly on one of the islands .
Ho , a Democrat elected to the legislature last month , denied earlier media reports that the group was armed with crossbows .
He said the group is unarmed and will avoid confrontation with the Japanese .
`` We have no weapons , no sticks , no knives , no guns .
All we have is passion for our country , '' he said .
`` We must emphasize that this is a peaceful , rational and non-violent protest . ''
The activists will meet with a group of right-wing Taiwanese nationalists , led by Taipei County counselor Kin Chieh -shou , off Keelung Island , just north of Taiwan , later this week before proceeding to the Diaoyu Islands , Ho said .
The Hong Kong activists will return home before June 30 , weather permitting , Ho said .
The disputed islands lie amid rich fishing grounds and possible oil and gas deposits midway between Taiwan and Japan 's Okinawa Island .
Japan originally claimed the chain in 1895 , but China and Taiwan say the islands have been Chinese for centuries .
The United States administered them after World War II , but turned over control to Japan in 1972 .
