TOKYO --
Voters humiliated Japan 's governing Liberal Democratic Party in elections on Sunday , choosing a maverick nationalist as the new governor of Tokyo .
Shintaro Ishihara , who easily defeated his rivals , had campaigned on a platform of pushing to get the United States to return one of its military bases in suburban Tokyo .
In a late-night acceptance speech , he said he will put pressure on Washington , beginning immediately , to return the Yokota Air Base .
`` If the U.S. is truly an equal partner with us , it is obliged to consider my demand seriously , '' said Ishihara , a dapper 66-year -old who rose to fame as a college student by writing a blockbuster novel .
Ishihara will not have the power as governor to evict American forces from the base .
But he is a forceful and dynamic politician , who by placing the issue on the public agenda can complicate life for the American forces in Japan .
The United States was caught in the mid-1990s in a debate over whether American military bases in the southern Japanese island group of Okinawa should be returned .
That furor has subsided , but American officials do not want a similar movement in Tokyo .
Thomas L. Foley , the American ambassador , was asked repeatedly Friday about Ishiharas campaign .
But he responded by saying that the United States does not comment on local Japanese elections .
Ishihara also has said that he plans to demand that Foley specify whether the United States will defend the Senkaku Islands , which are also claimed by China and Taiwan .
Foley would not comment on that either .
Officials in China and South Korea are apprehensive about Ishihara , not so much because of any international authority he can exert in Tokyo , but because he will have a stage for his nationalist views .
In the past , he has called for Japan to develop nuclear weapons , dismissed the 1937 `` Rape of Nanking , '' in which Japanese troops killed tens of thousands of Chinese , as `` a lie , '' and suggested that Japan might think about selling high-technology goods not to the United States but to Russia .
He comes across as someone who yearns for Japan to be treated with greater respect by other countries , especially the United States .
His election does not mean Tokyo voters necessarily agree with him on security issues .
He is also a forceful and charismatic politician and an unusually strong leader for Japan -- and he attributed his election to a desire for stronger leadership .
`` People want a strong and straightforward message , '' he said .
`` I have strongly felt that all the existing political parties have already lost their values , '' he added .
`` And politicians have not yet realized the fact . ''
Ishihara , although he served for many years in Parliament as a Liberal Democrat , ran as an independent .
The Liberal Democratic candidate , Yasushi Akashi , a former U.N. diplomat , had a dismal fourth-place finish .
It was the first time that a Liberal Democrat has not come in at least second .
Prime Minister Keizo Obuchis ' job seems secure despite the humiliation , but the Liberal Democrats ' secretary-general , Yoshiro Mori , may be pushed out to take responsibility for the defeat .
The party 's poor performance reflects its loss of influence in the big cities of Japan , but it retains its power in rural areas and it did reasonably well in other races around the country .
In particular , the Liberal Democrats won two of the three parliamentary seats that were being contested in by-elections .
