TOKYO --
Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi leaves Thursday for a major visit to China that aims to soothe relations between the great powers of East Asia and to improve the prospects of China 's admission into the World Trade Organization by the end of the year .
No major breakthrough in relations is expected .
But officials are frantically negotiating market-opening arrangements in hopes of helping to work out a deal for China to enter the trade organization .
That would be a major diplomatic triumph for Obuchi and would lead to important new opportunities and risks for China 's economy .
Prime Minister Zhu Rongji of China offered far-reaching trade concessions on his trip to the United States in the spring .
But the White House did not focus on the issue until the end of Zhu 's trip , and no deal was agreed on .
Then Washington publicized Zhu 's offer , embarrassing him at home and provoking a backlash from Chinese industries that would suffer from foreign competition .
Since then , it has been unclear whether Beijing would be willing to sweeten its offer or even keep it on the table .
Japanese officials declined to go into details of the negotiations , but suggested that China was being relatively flexible .
`` The negotiation is going on in Beijing , '' a spokesman for the foreign ministry , Sadaaki Numata , said .
`` There has been some further progress in certain areas .
But there are questions that remain unresolved . ''
In his two days in China , Obuchi will meet President Jiang Zemin and Prime Minister Zhu , as well as Li Peng , the hard-liner who is head of the National People 's Congress .
Attention is expected to focus on security issues .
In particular , Japan will raise its concerns about North Korea 's missile program and the prospect that North Korea will test a missile soon .
Japan would like China to put pressure on North Korea to hold off on the launching .
But China is not expected to agree .
In any case , it is not clear that China has much leverage over North Korea .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Japan will also ask China to stop sending ships that intrude into disputed waters near the Senkaku islands , which are also claimed by China and Taiwan and which they call the Diaoyu chain .
China , on the other hand , is most likely to voice irritation at new Japanese - American defense guidelines that would give Japan a greater military role -- supporting American forces -- in any conflict in the region .</ENAMEX>
China is apprehensive that the guidelines could be applied to Taiwan and that they signal a step toward greater Japanese military assertiveness .
Ties between China and Japan have been increasingly strained in the last few years , and a visit to Tokyo in November by Jiang seemed to add to the strains .
At every turn , Jiang vigorously raised the issue of Japan 's invasion of China early in the century , and by the end of the visit both sides seemed soured on the other .
`` The Obuchi visit should be used to halt the worsening in Japan - China relations , '' the Nihon Keizai Shinbun , one of Japan 's leading newspapers , urged in an editorial on Wednesday .
Obuchi has been trying to soothe the ill will , and in an interview with Chinese reporters on Tuesday he emphasized that Tokyo valued its relations with China .
`` Our ties with China constitute one of our most important bilateral relationships , and must be further strengthened toward the 21st century , '' Obuchi said .
Yet the underlying problem is a deep mutual suspicion , partly rooted in Japanese brutality in China during World War II .
Chinese complain that Japan has never properly apologized for the war and tries to deny its culpability .
Japanese insist that they have apologized many times and that it is time to move on .
In a recent poll of Chinese university students , 52 percent said they disliked Japan and 23 percent said they liked it .
Many Japanese say they believe that China is becoming more nationalistic , more aggressive and , ultimately , more threatening to peace in northeastern Asia .
