BEIJING , August 30 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- China has warned Japan not to do anything foolish over the Diaoyu islands in the East China Sea , an editorial in today 's People 's Daily said .
The Diaoyu islands , like Taiwan , are an inalienable part of China , as they have belonged to China since ancient times , the editorial said .
Over the last few weeks , Japan has carried out a series of provocative actions over this part of Chinese territory .
On July 14 , the right-wing Japanese Youth Foundation built a lighthouse on the Diaoyu islands .
The Japanese government announced an exclusive economic zone of 200 nautical miles on July 20 , which took in the Chinese islands .
Japanese Foreign Minister Yukihiko Ikeda then openly claimed that the Diaoyu islands belonged to Japan and said that there was no need to justify its claim .
On August 18 , a right-wing group from Japan 's southern Okinawa prefecture put up a board on one of the islands with a drawing of the Japanese flag on it .
The Diaoyu islands are situated between Taiwan and southern Japan .
There are reports that Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto has ordered the military to prepare for any contingency and that the Japanese authorities concerned even went so far as to threaten to resort to force if necessary , the editorial said .
The editorial pointed out that all the above acts show that Japan considers the Diaoyu islands its own territory .
The Chinese people will not stand for such actions which violate China 's territorial integrity , the editorial added .
China 's sovereignty over the Diaoyu islands is indisputable .
Evidence dating back as early as the Ming Dynasty -LRB- 1368-1644 -RRB- , when Chinese fishermen conducted activities in this area , prove the islands are part of China .
Japan seized Taiwan and its surrounding islands , including the Diaoyu islands , during the Sino - Japanese war of 1894-1895 .
In April 1895 , the government of the Qing Dynasty was forced to sign the Treaty of Shimonoseki , and ceded the islands to Japan , the editorial said .
After World War Two , a defeated Japan returned Taiwan to China , but handed the Diaoyu islands over to the United States .
In 1971 , the U.S. government illegally returned the Diaoyu islands to Japan , an action the Chinese government strongly opposed .
When Japan and China normalized relations in 1972 and signed the Sino - Japanese Treaty of Peace and Friendship in 1978 , the two countries , considering overall relations , agreed to leave the issue of the Diaoyu islands to be settled in the future , the editorial said .
However , the Japanese side broke its promise and behaved in an underhand way over the Diaoyu islands issue many times .
Japan has intensified its efforts to create instability and stir up trouble .
Japan tried to strengthen the symbolic significance of its occupation of the Diaoyu islands by playing the shameless card of `` if I have occupied then it 's mine . ''
