Ikeda said that in the past 25 years since the resumption of diplomatic ties , the two countries have continuously developed relations in all fields such as politics and economy .
The volume of two-way trade has grown by 60 times , while personnel exchanges increased by 120 times .
Despite some agitating issues in bilateral relations , he added , maintenance of a sound Sino - Japanese relationship is the responsibility of the two governments for the two peoples , the Asia - Pacific region , and the world .
The Japanese government will strictly adhere to the principles of the Joint Declaration , and the Peace and Friendship Treaty , so as to properly handle existing problems and promote the friendly bilateral relations , he said .
Ikeda said Prime Minister Hashimoto wants to visit China at a convenient time later this year .
He also extend Hashimoto 's invitation to Premier Li Peng to visit Japan .
Qian reiterated the Chinese side 's welcome to Hashimoto for his future visit to China .
The two foreign ministers agreed that the two sides will further confer on exchanges of visit by their leaders through diplomatic channels .
Qian said that the issue of history is an important factor hindering the relations between the two countries .
He wishes that Japan will deal with history correctly , draw useful lessons from the past , keep alert against forces that try to revive militarism and use the correct view of history to educate its younger generations .
`` We have noticed that recently , Japanese leaders have repeatedly expressed the will to face squarely the history , confess aggression against other countries and express deep introspection and apology .
The Chinese side expresses welcome on this , '' he said .
Qian also reiterated China 's stand on the Diaoyu Islands issue , saying that the Japanese government should restrain right-wing groups in Japan from causing troubles on the issue again so as to prevent them from hindering the general situation of Sino - Japanese relations .
Ikeda said the Japanese government holds the fundamental view on the history issue that it will inherit the former government 's stand on confessing aggression and apologizing sincerely for the deed .
On this basis , the Japanese government will face the future and develop friendly relations with China .
He agreed that territorial disputes should not affect the whole situation of Sino - Japanese relations .
The Japanese government will deal with the issue with a somber mind and endeavor to prevent another outbreak of troubles , he added .
It will further study possible measures to be taken in this regard .
Explaining China 's stand on the Taiwan issue , Qian said the Chinese government pays attention to the fact that Hashimoto declared the position against `` two Chinas '' and `` Taiwan independence '' during the meeting of the leaders of the two countries in Manila , the Philippines last year .
He said China wishes Japan to handle its relations with Taiwan in a proper way .
Ikeda said that the Japanese government will carefully handle its relations with Taiwan in accordance to the joint declaration of the two governments .
