BEIJING , September 13 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- A group of Japanese right-wingers landed on Beixiao island , one of China 's Diaoyu Islands on Monday to rebuild a lighthouse , the fourth time Japanese right-wing groups have seriously infringed China 's sovereignty over the islands since July .
The acts , which defy China 's solemn and just representations , cannot but arouse the indignation of the Chinese people .
The chain of Diaoyu Islands has been part of Chinese territory since ancient times .
China , out of consideration for Sino - Japanese friendly relations , has always maintained that the two sides , on the basis of respecting facts , should solve the dispute over the islands through consulation and dialog .
When China and Japan normalized diplomatic relations in 1972 and signed a treaty of peace and friendship in 1978 , the two sides agreed to shelve the issue for future solution .
Facts show that the understanding reached between the two sides was very important , as it was conducive to the development of bilateral relations .
China has long proposed `` putting aside disputes and carrying out joint development '' of the islands .
It has always abided by the proposal and exercised restraint over the issue .
Regrettably , Japanese right-wingers have caused trouble by landing on the islands .
These illegal activities violate China 's territorial sovereignty and hamper Sino - Japanese relations .
The Japanese government should ban such activities to reverse the adverse impact they have produced .
However , it is incomprehensible that the Japanese government has taken no effective measures to prohibit such activities .
Instead , it has taken a laissez-faire attitude and even connived at these activities , which have damaged Sino - Japanese friendship .
A spokesman for the Japanese Foreign Ministry said in Hong Kong recently that building a lighthouse , sending warships or planes to patrol the islands has nothing to do with any territorial dispute so long as the Japanese government exercises effective jurisdiction over the islands .
These erroneous and irresponsible words not only violate previous understandings between the two countries , but also bolster and encourage the right-wingers who are intentionally provoking China .
People wonder whether the illegal activities of the Japanese right-wingers have the government 's tacit support and whether there are ulterior motives for stirring up these incidents .
The Japanese side have claimed that the activities of the right-wingers `` do not violate Japan 's laws and so it is hard to take actions against them legally or politically . ''
They have even had the nerve to ask the Chinese side to show understanding .
What absurd logic !
The chain of Diaoyu Islands is an intrinsic part of Chinese territory , and this is an indisputable fact .
Members of Japan 's right-wing groups have set foot on Chinese territory , infringed China 's sovereignty and violated international law , and the Japanese government claims it is powerless to act !
People must now suspect that Japan 's claim to be `` a nation with adequate legal institutions '' is a lie or a boast .
Japan 's excuses are untenable .
The Japanese government has the duty and obligation to handle the serious situation over the Diaoyu Islands responsibly .
It has said verbally that it does not want to see the situation deteriorate , but then takes a laissez-faire attitude and even connives at the activities of the right-wingers .
This has led to the now distressing position of Sino - Japanese relations , which was quite clearly started unilaterally by Japan .
Sino - Japanese friendship has not come easily and embodies the efforts of several generations of Chinese and Japanese .
It should be cherished and safeguarded by both sides .
Any attempts to lead Sino - Japanese relations astray will do neither side any good .
We urge the Japanese government to take the interests of Sino - Japanese relations as a whole into account and act immediately to eliminate the adverse consequences and influence of these illegal activities and prevent similar incidents from happening in future .
