BEIJING , May 27 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- China 's top national newspaper Wednesday blasted a Japanese official 's inclusion of Taiwan in the scope of the updated Japan - U.S. defense cooperation guidelines .
In a commentary , the People 's Daily called for vigilance against a recent parliamentary statement by Takanu Norimoto , head of the Japanese Foregin Ministry 's North American Affairs Bureau .
Norimoto , in his remarks at the House of Representatives , indicated that Japan - U.S. defense cooperation would cover `` areas surrounding Japan , '' including South Korea and Taiwan , of China .
To support his argument , the Japanese official referred to an article in the Japan - U.S. Security Treaty signed in 1951 , which defines the Far East as the vast span north to the Philippines .
The People 's Daily commentary said Norimoto 's assertion signaled a shift away from the Japanese government 's rhetorics in the past and sounded out its intention to encroach on Taiwan .
Until recently , Japanese officials had claimed that cooperation with the United States would cover `` areas surrounding Japan that have an important influence on Japan 's peace and stability . ''
By avoiding explicit clarification , the commentary noted , the Japanese government had also said the scope of the defense guidelines is not targeted at specific geographical regions .
However , Norimoto picked up the Far East article of a treaty adopted in the Cold War era to make a change , and virtually included Taiwan in the U.S. - Japan defense cooperation scheme .
The Chinese people are strongly indignant at including Taiwan , an inalienable part of China , in Japan 's defense plan , as it is a blunt intervention into China 's internal affairs , said the commentary .
It 's recognized by the entire world community , as well as Japan in the two historic documents signed with China , that the Taiwan issue is a sheer internal affair of China , it reiterated .
Japan committed itself to such a position in both the Joint Statement of the Government of the People 's Republic of China and the Government of Japan in September 1972 , and the Treaty of Peace and Friendship Between the People 's Republic of China and Japan in August 1978 .
As late as last September , Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto expressed his full respect and understanding of China 's stance toward the Taiwan issue during his China tour .
In addition , the commentary said , the Japanese government had repeatedly assured China that the scope of the Japan - U.S. defense guidelines would not be expanded and directed at any third nation .
Norimoto 's remarks were against the spirit and principle of the two historic documents signed between the two countries , and those of the Japanese Constitution , the commentary pointed out .
The Article 9 of the Constitution states that `` the Japanese people forever renounce war as a sovereign right of the nation and the threat or use of force as means of settling international disputes . ''
However , the commentary said , two bills pending Japanese parliament 's ratification would allow the Japan 's Self - Defense Forces to provide logistics support to U.S. forces and to use aircraft and warships for the sake of `` security '' during emergencies in `` areas surrounding Japan . ''
Japanese scholars have warned that such bills would lift the restrictions imposed by the Article 9 of the Constitution , expand the scope of Japan - U.S. defense cooperation to broader areas of the Asia - Pacific region , and result in Japan 's use of force abroad .
The commentary noted that the Chinese government 's stance on issues related to the country 's territorial integrity and sovereignty has been consistent and explicit .
Any attempt harmful to the sovereignty of China is doomed to failure , it said , adding that any attempt to meddle into China 's internal affairs will meet strong condemnation and opposition from the Chinese government and people .
The commentary urged the Japanese government to take the security of the Asia - Pacific region and the long-term growth of the Sino - Japanese ties into serious consideration , so as to ride on the tide of the age and embark on the path of peaceful development .
