MOSCOW , November 12 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- A senior Russian official said Thursday that `` certain progress '' was reached at the talks between Russian President Boris Yeltsin and visiting Japanese Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi at the Kremlin .
Sergei Prikhodko , deputy head of the Russian Presidential Administration , said the talks took place `` in a brand new atmosphere created by the efforts of both countries , '' Interfax reported .
The present relations between Russia and Japan are marked by `` mutual respect , '' Prikhodko said .
`` These relations are being complicated by the negative historical legacy , but the two countries have managed to go beyond that and think about the future .
He was referring to the disputed four North Pacific islands .
The islands , known in Japan as the Northern Territories and in Russia as the Southern Kurils , have long been a sticking point barring the signing of a formal peace treaty between the two countries .
`` Gone is the time when we were using each other 's difficulties and problems , '' Prikhodko said .
`` We have come to take each other more seriously .
Moscow is very serious about the role of Japan in the emerging polycentric world .
Tokyo is equally serious about the role of Russia despite the difficulties the latter is going through . ''
He said Yeltsin passed the Japanese prime minister his proposals on a solution to the territorial dispute between the two countries .
`` Russia is not going to publicize these proposals primarily because we would not like to assert our position via the media or inflict any political damage on ourselves or our partner , '' Prikhodko said .
Obuchi promised that Japan will study Russia 's proposals as attentively as Russia had studied those of the Japanese , Prikhodko said .
Although the contents of the Russian proposal were kept secret , Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov said the Russian proposals amount to `` the formation of such conditions , which without damaging the state interests and political approaches of the sides , promote the development of a favorable atmosphere for joint economic and other activities on the Kuril islands . ''
Besides the territorial problem , the two leaders also discussed a wide range of other international and bilateral issues .
They praised the implementation of the plan for cooperation between the two countries approved by Yeltsin and former Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto at their informal talks in Krasnoyarsk , Siberia , last November .
Yeltsin and Obuchi acknowledged the progress achieved in such spheres as investment , Russia 's integration into the international economy , support for Russian reform , the preparation of Russian personnel , cooperation in the energy sector , the peaceful use of nuclear energy and joint space exploration projects .
Japan decided earlier this month to disburse 800 million U.S. dollars in the framework of the untied 1.5 billion dollar loan of the Export - Import Bank to boost reforms in Russia , Interfax reported .
Obuchi announced on Thursday that Tokyo would give Russia 10 million dollars worth of medicines and medical equipment .
Obuchi is here on a three-day official visit , the first one by a Japanese premier in 25 years .
He will also meet with Russian Minister Yevgeny Primakov on Friday .
