The editorial said that it is well known that in relations between countries , the issue of ownership of territory is the most sensitive one .
Japan has raised this sensitive issue many times recently .
We cannot help asking what Japan 's real intentions are , the editorial said .
Japan evidently wants to take advantage of the changes in the political situation in east Asia since the end of the Cold War to show off its power to the outside world and to test China 's determination to safeguard its territory and sovereignty .
China has always considered the situation as a whole and cherishes the friendly relations between China and Japan , but it will never waver on the issue of territory .
China 's stand on the Diaoyu islands is to put aside the dispute and jointly exploit the region on the precondition that China has sovereignty over the islands .
During a period of more than one hundred years , the Chinese people have never kow-towed to foreign powers .
They won back the independence and sovereignty of the country with the blood and lives of millions of people .
Today , if anybody thinks China 's 1.2 billion people will surrender even one inch of soil , they are indulging in fantasy ; if anybody holds the illusion that the Chinese people will yield to foreign forces , they are day dreaming ; if anybody wants to cause trouble over the relationship between the two sides of the Taiwan Straits , they are making a grave miscalculation , the editorial warned .
We can say with certainty that on the issue of a country 's territory and sovereignty , the Chinese people are as one .
No Chinese will surrender the country 's territory and sovereignty to anyone .
If anybody dares do so , he will be cursed for centuries .
Japan 's provocation of China over the Diaoyu islands is not accidental but is an inevitable result of emerging rightist elements in Japan 's internal political situation and Japan 's intention to flex its muscle .
Below are just a few of the numerous illustrations of this tendency .
In recent years many Japanese have distorted the country 's history of aggression , glorified its war of aggression and imbued its countrymen with a sense of militarism .
Some Japanese politicians are exaggerating the so-called `` China threat '' , tried their best to sow dissent between China and its neighboring countries , inventing an excuse for the expansion of its forces .
They have strengthened the Japan - U.S. security system , expanded its scope of protecting the country and even talked about `` paying attention to the trends of the Chinese military . ''
Japan has continually increased its military expenditure , engaged in arms proliferation and tried its best to send its soldiers abroad , the editorial said .
Asian countries have long expressed their concerns that Japan would embark on its old road of militarism .
These fears are not groundless .
The series of activities recently conducted by Japan seems to turn these fears into reality .
The editorial concluded that it appears as if some political figures in Japan have lost their heads .
Asian countries should try to calm them down and persuade them not to do anything foolish .
At the same time , Asia must maintain its vigilance over Japan 's actions .
