BEIJING , May 3 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- China will not accept any action designed to include the Taiwan Straits either directly or indirectly in the sphere of Japan - U.S. Defense Cooperation Guidelines , according to Chinese Defense Minister Chi Haotian today .
General Chi emphasized China 's position during afternoon talks with Fumio Kyuma , director-general of the Japanese Defense Agency .
China has paid close attention to laws Japan has either amended or enacted with regard to the Japan - U.S. Defense Cooperation Guidelines because they concern Taiwan , said Chi , who also serves as vice-chairman of the Central Military Commission and state councillor .
The Chinese government 's stand on the Taiwan issue is consistent and clear-cut , said Chi , adding that the Taiwan issue is China 's domestic affair .
He stressed that attempting to include the Taiwan Straits into the sphere of the guidelines would both violate and interfere in China 's sovereignty , and would be totally unacceptable to the Chinese government , people and armed forces .
Chi said China has also noticed that Japanese leaders have expressed their willingness to deal with that issue by adhering to the spirit of the Joint Statement issued by the two governments and the Treaty of Peace and Friendship between China and Japan .
`` We sincerely hope that Japan will handle the issue with great care , and will refrain from any actions which would cause worry on the part of neighboring nations .
Fumio Kyuma noted that Japan fully recognizes the government of the People 's Republic of China as the sole legal government representing China in accordance with the principles of the Sino - Japanese joint statement .
He said Japan fully understands and respects the fact that Taiwan is an inalienable part of Chinese territory .
`` We uphold this position , '' said Kyuma , noting that Japan will exhibit the utmost care when dealing with the Japan - U.S. Defense Cooperation Guidelines .
With regard to bilateral relationships , Chi stressed that China and Japan must take the past experience as reference and strictly adhere to the spirit of the bilateral joint statement and peace and friendship treaty while handling existing problems and any divergence in the process of developing friendship .
Chi said China is willing to engage in exchanges with the Japanese defense sector in all areas at all levels .
Fumio said Japan is pleased with the progress of bilateral exchanges in the realm of defense and is ready to further such exchanges to increase mutual trust and understanding .
Lieutenant General Xiong Guangkai , deputy chief of the General Staff of the Chinese People 's Liberation Amy , also attended the talks .
Kyuma and his party began their China visit May 1 .
They arrived in Beijing today following tours of Shanghai and Xi 'an .
