UNITED NATIONS , September 24 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen told his Japanese counterpart Yukihiko Ikeda Tuesday that there is no change in the basic policy of China to develop good relations between the two countries .
Qian , who is also vice-premier , made the remarks during their talks at the U.N. headquarters Tuesday .
He said the words and deeds recently of some Japanese politicians had badly hurt the feelings of the Chinese people .
Paying homage to the Yashukuni Shrine and seeking excuses for militarism had aroused great indignation among the people of China and other countries .
Qian stressed that the way of understanding and treating the Japanese military invasion in history was always a very sensitive and important issue which was related to the political foundation of the Sino - Japanese relations .
He urged Tokyo to follow the principles set in the Japan - China Joint Declaration and forbid anything that would harm the feeling of the Chinese people and the political foundations of the bilateral relations .
Qian reiterated that the Diaoyu Islands and the affiliated islands had been Chinese territory since ancient times , and the Chinese position on the issue was consistent and firm .
Taking the interests of the whole into account , Beijing and Tokyo had agreed to put aside the issue for future settlement when they decided to normalize their diplomatic ties in 1972 .
But recently some Japanese right-wing activists had repeatedly landed on the islands and built installations illegally , violating the territorial integrity and sovereignty of China .
`` We demand that the Japanese government take effective measures to eliminate the harmful influence of these acts and prevent such things from happening again . ''
Japanese Foreign Minister Ikeda said that the Japanese government attached great importance to Japan - China relations , and there had been no change in the country 's policy of friendship toward China .
He said that in the past , Japan 's external aggression and colonial rule brought great suffering to the people of many countries , and the people in China in particular .
Japan should acknowledge the fact and undergo a thorough self-examination on it .
It should also apologize to victimized countries .
The government headed by Tomiichi Murayama once made a formal statement on this issue .
And the government of Hashimoto had fully carried over the understanding and position of its predecessor .
Based on this stand , Ikeda said , the Japanese government would continue to develop its relations with China and deal in earnest with the homage paid by Japanese high-ranking officials at the Yasukuni Shrine , where the memorial plaques of seven class- A war criminals are enshrined .
He also said that his government would follow the principles and spirit of the Japan - China Joint Declaration and the Japan - China Treaty of Peace and Friendship .
Ikeda said the Japanese side hoped to have the disputes settled in a calm manner .
The Japanese government would neither get involved in nor support the right-wing activities , which , it believed , would damage relations between Japan and China and should not be allowed .
Qian also urged Japan to take a responsible attitude towards the issue of chemical weapons left over in China by the Japanese aggressors during the Second World War , and to speed up the settlement of the issue .
Ikeda said his country attached importance to the issue and was willing to hold formal consultations with China on it in November .
