GENEVA
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Under international pressure to curb its nuclear weapons capability , Pakistan said Thursday it supports immediately starting negotiations for a treaty to ban the production of material used to make nuclear weapons .
Addressing the 61-nation Conference on Disarmament , Pakistani Ambassador Munir Akram said , however , his government wants negotiations to deal with neighboring India 's larger stockpile of the so-called `` fissile materials , '' plutonium and highly enriched uranium .
Akram acknowledged the proposed treaty has been a main topic between the U.S. and Pakistani governments as Washington seeks ways to contain India 's and Pakistan 's development of nuclear weapons since both countries began test explosions earlier this year .
His statement came as top foreign ministry officials from India and Pakistan resumed talks in Sri Lanka .
On Wednesday , their prime ministers broke a yearlong stalemate and agreed to try again to resolve their territorial and other disputes .
At talks last week in Islamabad , he said , `` Pakistan and the United States agreed to support the immediate commencement of negotiations '' on a treaty to ban production of nuclear-weapons material .
At those talks Pakistan pressed for international mediation on the Kashmir dispute with neighboring India , while the United States urged Pakistan to sign the Comprehensive Test Ban treaty .
Pakistan 's signing that treaty would depend on `` assurance against the possibility of further nuclear testing by India , '' Akram said Thursday .
He said Pakistan was prepared for a separate test-ban agreement with India and that it `` is not interested in further escalation up the nuclear ladder with India . ''
Conference delegations said it remained to be seen what other key countries , such as Brazil and Egypt , would say to the proposal that a committee be set up to discuss the fissile material treaty .
Action on fissile material is referred to by arms negotiators as the `` cut off '' treaty because it would stop the production of nuclear weapons .
