ISLAMABAD , Pakistan
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Faced with a demand for nuclear restraint , Pakistan promised Friday to act responsibly but said it wo n't allow itself to fall behind neighboring rival India .
`` While we will not provoke escalation , our responses will be carefully calibrated to respond to any provocation or escalation by India , '' said a government statement .
On Thursday , the foreign ministers of the five established nuclear powers called on India and Pakistan to step back from the brink of nuclear confrontation after both tested atomic devices last month .
The Pakistani statement did not address the specifics of the foreign ministers ' demand to refrain from deploying nuclear weapons , conducting more missile tests or producing fissile material .
Nor did Pakistan say if it would consider joining the nonproliferation regimes that have kept a lid on the spread of nuclear technology .
India calls those treaties discriminatory since they do not ask the nuclear powers to disarm .
Pakistan says it will sign them only if India does .
`` We will continue to conduct ourselves with restraint and responsibility , '' said the statement issued by the Foreign Ministry .
`` However , Pakistan will not allow itself to be placed in a position of strategic vulnerability or inequality . ''
In Geneva , the foreign ministers of the United States , Britain , Russia , China and France offered their help in `` promoting reconciliation and conciliation . ''
But they stopped short of proposing mediation on the disputed territory of Kashmir , which has triggered two of the three Indo - Pakistan wars .
Pakistan would welcome such mediation .
Its statement said the Geneva initiative should be the beginning of international involvement in the Indian subcontinent .
In the past , India has said the Kashmir problem must be sorted out by the two countries alone .
The statement also offered to resume talks between the top foreign ministry officials of India and Pakistan that were suspended last year .
`` But it is evident now that the bilateral dialogue needs to be supplemented by a broader multilateral process to promote durable peace and security in South Asia , '' it said .
India detonated a series of devices starting May 11 .
Rejecting international attempts to forestall a Pakistani test , Islamabad demonstrated its own nuclear capability on May 28 .
`` We are not interested in a nuclear or conventional arms race , '' the statement said , noting Pakistan had previously called for regional and bilateral nonproliferation agreements .
