UNITED NATIONS
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
By a unanimous vote , the Security Council demanded Saturday that India and Pakistan refrain from further nuclear tests , halt weapons programs and sign nuclear arms control agreements unconditionally .
The Indian foreign ministry denounced the resolution as `` coercive and unhelpful '' and said `` we find it grotesque that an organ of the United Nations should seek to address India in this manner . ''
The resolution , co-sponored by Japan , Slovenia , Sweden and Costa Rica , denied India and Pakistan legal status as `` nuclear powers . ''
Formal status would enable them to keep their nuclear arms under the 1970 Nuclear Non - Proliferation Treaty .
Japanese Ambassador Hishashi Owada said the Indian and Pakistani tests last month threaten the entire global system of nuclear controls and could plunge the international community `` into an uncontrollable world of nuclear proliferation . ''
U.S. Ambassador Bill Richardson said the tests `` represent a profound blow '' to efforts to control nuclear weapons and called on the two countries to heed the council 's call `` because it is in their own best interest . ''
But non-nuclear states also sent a strong message to the United States and the four other nuclear powers to fulfill commitments to reduce their own nuclear arsenals .
`` India and Pakistan have returned the world to the dark years of the nuclear terror , '' Canadian Ambassador Robert Fowler said after the vote .
But Fowler called on the nuclear states to `` fulfill your commitments to reduce your nuclear weapons stocks . ''
That indicates the challenge facing the United States and the other self-declared nuclear powers -- Russia , China , France and Britain -- in marshaling international pressure to curb the nuclear arms race in South Asia .
Iran , Egypt and Bahrain also accused the Security Council of a double-standard by ignoring Israel 's suspected nuclear weapons program .
Israel , which has never confirmed holding nuclear weapons , has refused to sign the non-proliferation treaty and accept international safeguards on its nuclear program .
Iran 's foreign minister , Kamal Kharrazi , said `` Israeli intransigence '' on accepting nuclear controls `` has endangered the entire '' Middle East .
Israel has never admitted having nuclear weapons but is widely assumed to have the necessary technology to build a bomb quickly .
Nuclear states agreed to take steps to reduce their arsenals as part of a compromise agreement to convince other nations to accept an indefinite extension of the non-proliferation treaty three years ago .
Addressing the nuclear powers , Kenyan Ambassador Njunguna Mahugu said `` the rest of us expect you to seriously take your responsibility of finally removing the threat of nuclear weapons . ''
The resolution condemned the South Asian tests and urged India and Pakistan to halt deployment of missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads and to sign nuclear arms control treaties .
It also called on India and Pakistan to exercise restraint and to find `` mutually acceptable solutions '' to the `` root causes of those tensions , including Kashmir , '' the Himalayan territory divided between the two .
The resolution welcomed an offer by U.N. Secretary - General Kofi Annan to encourage India and Pakistan to resume a high-level dialogue that broke down last year because of differences over Kashmir .
