ISLAMABAD , Pakistan
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Pakistan warned Thursday that its unilateral moratorium on nuclear testing could broken if it discovers neighboring India has taken a lead in the nuclear arms race .
`` If at any stage we feel that we need to take actions which are necessary in our supreme national interest , we reserve the right to take such actions , '' according to a foreign ministry statement issued in response to a question of whether the unilateral moratorium meant the end to nuclear testing for Pakistan .
Pakistan tested six nuclear devices last month , one-upping its longstanding enemy India which tested five nuclear devices two weeks before Pakistan 's tests .
The nuclear testing caused an international furor and sparked fears among the world 's major powers of a nuclear arms race in an impoverished region that has been the scene of three wars in 51 years .
Pakistan and India fought two wars over the disputed state of Kashmir , in 1948 and again in 1965 .
It fought a third war in 1965 over Bangladesh , or what was known then as east Pakistan .
A fourth confrontation loomed in 1990 when relations between the two countries plummeted again over Kashmir , the former Himalayan state that both countries claim .
Earlier this month , Pakistan 's Foreign Minister Gohar Ayub warned that a fourth conflagration on the subcontinent would likely escalate into a nuclear war .
The international community has urged both Pakistan and India to step back from the edge of a nuclear arms race .
Pakistan has offered to sign a non-aggression pact with India as well as a regional no-test agreement , but New Delhi has rejected both .
`` We have made it clear that Pakistan , while continuing to exercise restraint , will nonetheless calibrate its response to the level of provocation , '' said the foreign ministry statement .
`` There are a number of factors which need to be analyzed , '' including the results of India 's nuclear tests and the potential weapons capability of neighboring India , it said .
`` We will continue to closely scrutinize our regional security situation in order to ensure that a balance is maintained at all times , '' the statement said .
