The joint communique issued Thursday by the five longstanding nuclear powers on the India - Pakistan nuclear tests : ___ 1 .
Bearing in mind the responsibility of their countries for the maintenance of international peace and security , the foreign ministers of China , France , Russia , the United Kingdom and the United States met in Geneva on June 4 , 1998 , to coordinate their response to the grave situation created by the nuclear tests carried out in May 1998 by India and then by Pakistan .
The ministers condemned these tests , expressed their deep concern about the danger to peace and stability in the region and pledged to cooperate closely in urgent efforts to prevent a nuclear and missile arms race in the Subcontinent , to bolster the nonproliferation regime and to encourage reconciliation and peaceful resolution of differences between India and Pakistan .
2 .
The ministers agreed that quick action is needed to arrest the further escalation of regional tensions stimulated by the recent nuclear tests .
India and Pakistan should therefore stop all further such tests .
They should refrain from the weaponization or deployment of nuclear weapons , from the testing or deployment of missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons and from any further production of fissile material for nuclear weapons .
They should also halt provocative statements , refrain from any military movements that could be construed as threatening and increase transparency in their actions .
Direct communications between the parties could help to build confidence .
3 .
To reinforce security and stability in the region and more widely , the five strongly believe that Indian and Pakistan should adhere to the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty immediately and unconditionally , thereby facilitating its early entry into force .
The five also call upon India and Pakistan to participate in a positive spirit and on the basis of the agreed mandate , in negotiations with other states in the Conference on Disarmament for a Fissile Material Cut -off convention with a view to reaching early agreement .
The five will seek firm commitments by India and Pakistan not to weaponize or deploy nuclear weapons or missiles .
India and Pakistan should also confirm their policies not to export equipment , materials or technology that could contribute to weapons of mass destruction or missiles capable of delivering them , and should undertake appropriate commitments in that regard .
4 .
The ministers agreed that the international nonproliferation regime must remain strong and effective despite the recent nuclear tests in South Asia .
Their goal continues to be adherence by all countries , including India and Pakistan , to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty -LRB- NPT -RRB- as it stands , without any modification .
This treaty is the cornerstone of the nonproliferation regime and the essential foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament .
Notwithstanding their recent nuclear tests , India and Pakistan do not have the status of nuclear weapons states in accordance with the NPT .
5 .
The ministers concluded that efforts to resolve disputes between India and Pakistan must be pursued with determination .
The ministers affirm their readiness to assist India and Pakistan , in a manner acceptable to both sides , in promoting reconciliation and cooperation .
The ministers pledged that they will actively encourage India and Pakistan to find mutually acceptable solutions , through direct dialogue , that address the root causes of the tension , including Kashmir , and to try to build confidence rather than seek confrontation .
In that connection , the ministers urged both parties to avoid threatening military movements , cross-border violations or other provocative acts .
6 .
The ministers also considered what actions the five could take , individually or collectively , to foster peace and security in South Asia .
They will encourage India and Pakistan to adopt practical measures to prevent an arms race .
They confirmed their respective policies to prevent the export of equipment , materials or technology that could in any way assist programs in India or Pakistan for nuclear weapons or for ballistic missiles capable of delivering such weapons .
They also undertook to do all they could to facilitate a reduction of tensions between those states and to provide assistance , at the request of both parties , in the development and implementation of and security-building measures .
They remain determined to fulfill their commitments relating to nuclear disarmament under Article VI of the NPT .
7 .
The ministers viewed their meeting in Geneva as setting in motion a process aimed at strengthening peace and stability in South Asia , at encouraging restraint by India and Pakistan , at promoting the resolution of outstanding differences and at bolstering the international nonproliferation regime .
They will remain fully engaged in pursuing these goals and will work actively to build broad support in the international community for the objectives they agreed today .
