NEW DELHI , India
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Escalating tension over nuclear weapons appears to have buried the already faltering peace process between traditional rival neighbors India and Pakistan .
Only a year ago , citizens of both countries were applauding what they hoped to be the start of a new era in their long , stormy relationship .
Then - Prime Minister Inder Kumar Gujral of India and his Pakistani counterpart Nawaz Sharif , meeting at a regional summit in the Maldives , agreed to open negotiations on a number of disputes .
Now , with the 1998 edition of the seven-nation regional summit a month away , this time in Sri Lanka , the mood is different .
Last month , India tested nuclear devices May 11-13 .
In response , Pakistan claimed to have detonated six nuclear devices last week .
The negotiations Gujral and Sharif kicked off to such fanfare never got much beyond the stage of bureaucrats wrangling over the agenda .
The centrist Gujral was replaced two months ago by Atal Bihari Vajpayee who , though considered a moderate , leads the right-wing Bharatiya Janata Party known for Pakistan -bashing .
`` Both countries have myopic leaders and fragile economies .
They ca n't afford a war .
There is no choice for India and Pakistan but to talk to each other , '' said Anand Kumar , political analyst and professor at New Delhi 's Jawaharlal Nehru University .
`` Dialogue should continue , '' said Dina Dayalan of the Indian chapter of the Pakistan - India Peoples ' Forum for Peace and Democracy , a group of private citizens on both sides of the border who have tried to ease tensions by promoting contacts between ordinary people .
Tariq Rahman , active in the Pakistani counterpart to Dayalan 's group , said the tests set back efforts to build trust by creating a `` tremendous feeling of antagonism '' among ordinary people .
He hopes that the `` belligerency '' would die down over time , enabling leaders of India and Pakistan to meet to discuss how to avoid using their new weapons of mass destruction .
But in the short term , Rahman said , it is hard to envision such talks .
The arms race has long drained both countries , among the poorest in the world .
The United Nations Children 's Fund estimated that between 1990 and 1996 , India spent an average of 2 percent of its annual budget on education , and 14 percent on defense .
Pakistan spent just 1 percent on education , and a whopping 31 percent on defense .
Pakistan and India have fought three wars since they were carved from the same British colony 50 years ago .
The chief bone of contention between officially Islamic Pakistan and predominately Hindu India is the Himalayan region of Kashmir , which is divided between them and claimed in its entirety by both countries .
If Vajpayee and Sharif do hold one-on-one talks at next month 's regional summit , the main topic is likely to be the region 's new nuclear realities , pushing efforts to normalize relations into the background .
Syed Ali Shah Geelani , who leads a coalition of parties that wants India -held Kashmir -- the country 's only Muslim -majority state -- to break away from India , said the rivalry over Kashmir led to the nuclear arms race between India and Pakistan .
`` The main root of this is Kashmir .
They should open serious talks to resolve the Kashmiri issue , '' said Geelani , who wants Kashmir either to form an independent country or to join Pakistan .
