MOSCOW
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Russia will not cancel a lucrative arms deal with India in response to its nuclear tests , and appealed Tuesday to both India and Pakistan to sign the Nuclear Non - Proliferation Treaty .
`` Moscow is interested in preventing the escalation of tension between Delhi and Islamabad , in neutralizing the dangerous consequences of the nuclear tests carried out by these countries , '' Russian Foreign Ministry spokesman Valery Nesterushkin said .
He urged both India and Pakistan to sing the non-proliferation and Comprehensive Test Ban treaties , the Interfax news agency said .
Belarus also joined the protests against the nuclear tests Wednesday , saying they `` have sharpened our worry about a possible chain reaction of nuclear proliferation not only in South Asia but also beyond it . ''
Belarus gave up the nuclear weapons it inherited from the former Soviet Union .
`` Belarus , which several years ago has made a historic choice in favor of discarding the nuclear potential it possessed , and which is a party in a number of major agreements on nuclear disarmament , cannot but feel a special responsibility and concern in connection with such turn of events , '' a Belarusian Foreign Ministry statement said .
The nuclear tests in India and Pakistan will be discussed Wednesday , when Russia plays host to a meeting of top diplomats from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations , ITAR - Tass reported .
Foreign ministers of the five permanent members of the U.N. Security Council -- including Russia -- plan similar talks Thursday in Geneva , and discussions on whether to impose sanctions , as favored by the United States .
Russia has no plans to cancel its contracts for the sale of Su -30 fighters to India , representatives of the Sukhoi aircraft company said Tuesday , according to Interfax .
India already has received eight Su -30 fighters under a dlrs 1.8 billion deal to buy 40 advanced aircraft from Russia , concluded in 1996 .
The rest are expected to be delivered by 2000 .
India is among the most lucrative customers for Russia 's weapons industry , and Moscow is eager to protect the much-needed market .
-LRB- ad/ls -RRB-
