UNITED NATIONS
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Hoping to curb a dangerous arms race in South Asia , the U.N. Security Council voted unanimously Saturday to urge India and Pakistan to halt their nuclear weapons programs and to deny them status as nuclear states .
But members also warned the nuclear weapons states -- the United States , Russia , China , France and Britain -- that they have a responsibility to renew efforts to curb nuclear weapons , including those in their own arsenals .
`` The rest of us expect you to seriously take your responsibility of finally removing the threat of nuclear weapons , which , even with the end of the Second World War , continues to hang over our heads , '' Kenyan Ambassador Njunguna Moses Mahugu said .
Swedish Ambassador Hans Dahlgren said it was not enough to `` stem the flow '' of nuclear weapons .
`` We must also turn the tide , '' Dahlgren said .
`` And the ultimate goal is to eliminate all weapons of mass destruction .
The five nuclear weapons states bore the particular responsibility to make that possible . ''
The resolution , submitted by Japan , Costa Rica , Slovenia and Sweden , urged India and Pakistan to halt deployment of missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads and to sign nuclear arms control treaties .
It also asked India and Pakistan to exercise restraint and to find `` mutually acceptable solutions '' to the `` root causes of those tensions , including Kashmir . ''
The resolution also states that although India and Pakistan have exploded nuclear devices , they would not be accorded status as nuclear states .
Under the 1970 Nuclear Non - Proliferation Treaty , the five nuclear powers are the only nations allowed to maintain nuclear arsenals .
India and Pakistan have refused to sign the treaty .
The resolution also welcomed an offer by U.N. Secretary - General Kofi Annan to encourage India and Pakistan to resume a high-level dialogue that broke down last year because of differences over Kashmir .
The resolution also `` encourages '' member states to prevent the export of materials , equipment and technology `` that could in any way assist programs in India or Pakistan for nuclear weapons . ''
`` Nuclear tests conducted by India and Pakistan in recent weeks represent a profound blow not only to the stability and security of their region but also to the international non-proliferation regime on which we all depend , '' U.S. Ambassador Bill Richardson said .
Despite sanctions that Washington imposed on the two countries , Richardson said U.S. policy is not to make India and Pakistan `` pariah states '' but to `` engage and to convince them that it is in their own national security interests to do what the international community is urging them to do . ''
Before the vote , India slammed the council action , saying it overstepped the council 's authority .
India also renewed accusations there was a double-standard that allows the five longstanding nuclear states -- which are also permanent council members -- to retain their arsenals .
In a letter to council President Antonio Monteiro , India 's U.N. ambassador , Kamalesh Sharma , said the resolution involved `` sovereign decisions taken by member states , not matters in which the council has any role . ''
Sharma asked whether the Security Council can `` continue to ignore the overwhelming demand '' of the rest of the world `` for elimination of nuclear weapons '' when the most important council members refuse to dismantle their own arsenals .
India and Pakistan have fought three wars since 1947 -- two of them over Kashmir , which is divided between them .
