ISLAMABAD , Pakistan
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Marking the second anniversary of Pakistan 's nuclear tests , army ruler Gen. Pervez Musharraf said Sunday that Pakistan and India have to settle their dispute over Kashmir to remove `` the threat of a nuclear holocaust . ''
The military chief said he has repeatedly offered talks with neighboring India to settle the long-running dispute , which sparked a bitter border battle last summer and has led to two full-scale wars in recent decades .
`` We do n't want the people of South Asia to live under the threat of a nuclear holocaust , '' Musharraf said .
`` But India should n't take our offer as a sign of weakness . ''
He told a public gathering in the federal capital that Pakistan is not interested in embarking on a nuclear arms race .
However , he warned that Pakistan would not be left behind if neighbor India forged ahead with nuclear weapons development .
The speech came exactly two years after Pakistan ran underground nuclear tests in response to Indian tests weeks earlier .
Today , depending who you ask in Pakistan , it 's either a safer Asian subcontinent because of the tit-for-tat nuclear explosions -- or it 's the likeliest spot for the world 's first nuclear war .
Musharraf says nuclear deterrence has ensured Pakistan 's security and created a strategic balance in a region that has seen three wars in the last 53 years .
As recently as last summer , the border dispute over Kashmir -- a mountainous region divided between Pakistan and India and claimed in its entirety by both -- threatened to escalate into an all-out confrontation .
This week , Musharraf said he did n't believe either side would be foolish enough to take their nations to the brink of a nuclear war .
But others in Pakistan are not so certain .
Some fear that many in Pakistan and in India -- where the literacy rate is barely 30 percent , even less among women -- may not realize the effect of a nuclear explosion .
`` The ... consequences of nuclear weapons are too horrible to think of , but in India and Pakistan most people do n't know about it , '' said Mohammed Illyas , who owns a camera shop in the federal capital .
`` They are emotional .
They think of each other as a rival and they want to kill each other even if it means their own death . ''
During the last year , Pakistan built monuments to its nuclear capability .
Replica ballistic missiles were erected at major intersections .
On the outskirts of the federal capital , a giant fiberglass rock was erected to represent Chagai Hills , where the underground explosions took place .
Ahmed Kamal , who runs a roadside business , said Pakistan 's decision to conduct underground nuclear tests on May 28 , 1998 , made him feel proud .
`` We feel safe because now everybody knows about our power , our neighbor knows , '' he said .
But analysts worry that unless the two countries begin talking -- and quickly -- the South Asian subcontinent will be launched on a nuclear arms race .
`` The reality of a nuclear South Asia is there and that is not going to go away , '' said Dr. Riffat Hussain , a political scientist at Islamabad 's Qaid -e- Azam University .
Both Pakistan and India have said nuclear weapons are a part of their arsenals .
Both countries possess ballistic missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads , though neither country is believed to have developed a nuclear warhead .
Hussain says they have to start talking before they cross that threshold .
`` We have this small window of opportunity now and if we do n't take advantage of it we are heading toward deployment and a nuclear arms race , '' he said .
But relations between India and Pakistan are hardly conducive to dialogue .
India refuses to talk to Pakistan unless it withdraws militant secessionists from Indian Kashmir .
Pakistan , meanwhile , denies all involvement in arming or training the militants fighting in the Indian -ruled section of Kashmir .
Aziz Saddiq , a spokesman for the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan , a fierce opponent of nuclear development , said Pakistan is worse off today than two years ago .
The economy is in ruins , international pressure has persisted and relations with India are at an all-time low , he said .
`` What have we gained ? '' he asked .
`` Nothing .
Two years ago everyone knew we had the nuclear capability .
We could have not tested , gained economically and internationally from it . ''
