The New York Times said in an editorial for Friday , June 5 : Now that India and Pakistan have at least temporarily halted their nuclear tests and toned down their rhetoric , there is an opening for diplomacy aimed at freezing further weapons development .
A modest step was taken Thursday in Geneva , where Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and the foreign ministers of Russia , China , Britain and France urged India and Pakistan to refrain from further testing and open negotiations with each other .
The meeting also called on the two countries to sign the international treaties banning the testing and spread of nuclear weapons .
But achieving these worthy goals will not be easy , and a newly nuclear South Asia still crackles with danger .
India and Pakistan are both working to miniaturize their nuclear bombs to fit on missiles ; their troops trade fire across a tense border , and they cannot even agree on a format for discussing their conflicting claims to Kashmir .
India and Pakistan must be coaxed into signing the international nuclear treaties .
In return they should be given access to the safety technology that established nuclear powers use to prevent accidental detonations and theft .
Encouragingly , Indian Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee has proposed a testing moratorium and offers to negotiate an agreement with Pakistan promising that neither country will be the first to introduce nuclear weapons into combat .
Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif also seems interested in negotiating new guidelines for military restraint .
But New Delhi says it will sign the global nuclear arms treaties only if it is legally recognized as a nuclear weapons country .
That would legitimize India 's plans to proceed further toward arming itself with nuclear weapons .
India also conditions its signature on the established nuclear powers ' committing themselves to eliminating their own nuclear arsenals .
That is a desirable goal , but has little chance of achievement in the near future .
The five nuclear powers Thursday rightly rejected amending the treaties to expand the ranks of nuclear armed countries .
But there may be artful language that can satisfy Indian and Pakistani pride while preserving the integrity of the accords .
Congress should give President Clinton authority to lift sanctions against India or Pakistan if either signs the treaties .
Russia has special ties to this region , as does China .
Beijing helped Pakistan develop its bomb , but now wants to show it can act responsibly against the spread of nuclear weapons .
They should act in concert with Washington to help edge South Asia back from the nuclear brink .
