WASHINGTON --
ON their northern border , high in the Himalayas , India and Pakistan have for years been fighting for position and not much else along a glacier that is virtually uninhabitable .
On mountains reaching 20,000 feet , their armies snipe and trade artillery blasts , if the weather allows .
By most definitions , it is war , but a small war .
Each side loses as many soldiers to altitude sickness as to combat .
Last week 's nuclear tests by Pakistan -- coming two weeks after India 's own tests -- have abruptly and fundamentally changed the confrontation between India and Pakistan , which had become a limited , relatively low-intensity military standoff .
Although both countries have had covert nuclear programs for decades , the tests brought both much closer to actually putting nuclear weapons in their arsenals and , worse , on the potential battlefields along their hotly disputed border .
That is why arms-control experts say the truly alarming thing that Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif 's government announced on Thursday was not that Pakistan had successfully conducted its own tests .
Rather it was the declaration that Pakistan was already fitting nuclear warheads on top of a missile , tested only last month , that is capable of striking most of India .
Michael Krepon , the president of the Henry L. Stimson Center , an independent research institute here , said the development of nuclear weapons progressed in clear stages : from research to design to tests to the making of the bombs or warheads themselves .
`` A crucial threshold has been crossed , if it 's true , '' Krepon said of Pakistan 's declaration about fitting its missile .
`` And that means we have only two thresholds left : deployment and use . ''
For all the rhetorical bluster by both sides , though , there is still a large gap between conducting successful tests and building effective , usable weapons .
And that is where officials in Washington and around the world are looking these days for a glimmer of hope that there is still time to head off a terrifying spiral of escalation that could draw in India 's other enemy , China .
India is said to have enough fissile material for perhaps 50 nuclear devices , maybe more .
Pakistan has enough for perhaps 12 .
Experts have long assumed that both can make Hiroshima -scale bombs to drop from planes , but that is considered an unreliable way to deliver nuclear weapons since planes can be shot down .
There is almost no evidence that either country has mastered the ability to make warheads small enough to fit on missiles , though not for lack of trying .
Senior administration officials cast doubt on Pakistan 's claims to have already fitted its longest-range missile with nuclear warheads .
`` That would be a fateful and foolish step , '' one official said on condition of anonymity .
Even so , the mere claim was sure to leave India 's nuclear strategists wondering , intensifying already inflamed emotions .
And the experts agreed it is only a matter of time before both can field nuclear warheads .
In recent years both India and Pakistan have come to rely more and more on their strategic forces .
Pakistan , in particular , has poured its scarce resources into developing nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles , purchasing equipment and technology from China , as well as North Korea .
-LRB- More than a quarter of Pakistan 's federal spending goes to defense , compared to 14 percent for India . -RRB-
Pakistan has taken this route to compensate for an overwhelming disadvantage in conventional forces .
India has twice as many soldiers -- nearly 1.2 million to about 600,000 -- and twice as many combat aircraft .
What 's more , much of Pakistan 's population and economic heart lie within easy striking distance of India 's border , leaving it vulnerable .
While Pakistan has a number of short-range missiles , it tested its first longer-range missile just last month , a test that India cited as provocation when it conducted its nuclear tests .
Pakistan 's missile is said to have a range of 900 miles , which would bring most of India 's major cities within striking distance .
Although built with North Korean help , Pakistan named it the Ghauri , after a Muslim warrior who defeated a 12th-century Hindu ruler of India named Prithvi .
While Pakistan lags behind India in conventional forces , many experts say it may have an edge in missiles .
India 's most effective missiles , the Prithvi series , have relatively short ranges .
And while India has tested a longer-ranged missile , called the Agni , it has yet to complete its development .
In the meantime , the United States and other countries are scrambling to stop South Asia 's suddenly revived arms race before it escalates any further .
On Friday , the United Nations Security Council called on India and Pakistan to sign the treaties against the spread and testing of nuclear weapons that , until now , had limited the world 's declared nuclear powers to the United States , Russia , Britain , France and China .
The hope is that India and Pakistan will call a halt to their nuclear programs where they now stand , although neither has so far shown much willingness to heed the world 's pleas .
The Pakistanis `` are ready to die for their respect , '' Sharif warned in a televised address to his nation , brushing aside the sanctions the United States imposed only hours later .
For now , the best hope may lie with the fact that a fundamental taboo has existed against the use of nuclear weapons ever since the world learned what those weapons could do when the United States dropped them on Japan to end World War II .
That and the prospect of `` mutually assured destruction , '' known widely by the grim acronym MAD , kept the United States and Soviet Union from firing them throughout the Cold War .
But India and Pakistan have suddenly made the specter of a nuclear exchange seem less remote .
The United States and the Soviet Union , after all , never shared a border .
Nor did they directly quarrel over a territory as volatile as Jammu and Kashmir , the predominantly Muslim enclave carved up after India and Pakistan gained independence from Britain in 1947 .
`` Unresolved disagreements , deep animosity and distrust , and the continuing confrontation between their forces in disputed Kashmir make the subcontinent a region with a significant risk of nuclear confrontation , '' the Pentagon concluded in a report published before this month 's tit-for-tat tests .
Arms -control experts now worry that the world could be closer to nuclear war than at any time since the Cuban missile crisis in 1962 .
That was the only time in the 53 years of the nuclear age when it seemed likely that any two nuclear powers might descend into direct large-scale hostilities with each other .
American and Chinese troops fought in the Korean War , but that was long before China had nuclear weapons ; China and India fought a border war in 1962 , but that was before either went nuclear .
In those same 53 years .
India and Pakistan have fought three wars and have perpetually seemed on the verge of a fourth -- never with more devastating potential consequences than now .
