NEW DELHI , India --
India 's defense minister said Wednesday that President Clinton should explain why the United States believes that it can `` trust China with nuclear weapons '' while imposing economic sanctions on India for seeking a nuclear deterrent against threats from its nuclear-armed neighbors , China and Pakistan .
Speaking a week before Clinton is to leave Washington to visit China , Defense Minister George Fernandes said American policies on nuclear weapons were `` hypocritical '' because they sought to entrench the arsenals of the five established nuclear powers while shutting out countries like India that believe they need nuclear weapons for their own defense .
Fernandes said Indian leaders had noted recent news reports in which Clinton administration officials had spoken of the United States and China becoming `` strategic partners '' and of plans for an agreement that neither side would aim nuclear missiles at the other .
At the same time , Fernandes said , the United States was leading efforts to punish India with economic sanctions for its underground nuclear tests last month .
`` I would ask Bill Clinton only one question , '' Fernandes said in an interview in his office .
`` And it would be this : Why is it that you feel yourself so close to China , that you can trust China with nuclear weapons , just as you can trust yourselves with nuclear weapons , and you can trust the Russians and the French and the British , but you cannot trust India ? ''
In the interview , Fernandes hinted at the kind of nuclear arsenal India intends to develop in the wake of the five nuclear tests it conducted , and the six tests Pakistan says it carried out in response .
He said the Indian arsenal would be only large enough to act as a deterrent to potential aggressors , and that India would not get drawn into the kind of nuclear arms race that led the United States and the Soviet Union to amass huge nuclear stockpiles .
He said India had learned the lessons of the Cold War .
`` The United States , with all the might of its nuclear weapons , had to finally get out of Vietnam , and Russia had to surrender , of all people , to the Chechens , '' he said .
`` So it is an established fact that any country that has nuclear weapons cannot use them .
By definition , they can be used only as a deterrent . ''
He added : `` If we had to go nuclear , it was for the purpose of possessing a nuclear deterrent that would enable us to tackle some of the threats that we faced , only that . ''
He described these threats as coming primarily from `` across the border to the north , '' meaning from China , and from Pakistan , which he said had been aided by transfers of nuclear and missile technology from China .
His remarks were in line with the toned-down approach India has adopted since euphoria over the nuclear tests began to subside .
Immediately after the tests , Fernandes said India intended to place nuclear warheads atop its missiles .
But recently , India 's emphasis has been on its readiness to negotiate on nuclear issues with Pakistan and the five established nuclear powers .
Fernandes refused to go into details on the number of nuclear warheads India felt it needed , or how they would be deployed .
But in response to a question , he said India 's approach would follow what defense analysts here have described as `` recessed deterrence . ''
The term has been used here to describe a nuclear arsenal powerful enough to deter aggressors but not so large as to impose crippling economic costs .
Many Indian experts have said that an arsenal of this kind could be `` warehoused '' to be deployed only in a crisis .
India would be prepared to forgo even this `` minimal '' deterrent , Fernandes said , if the established nuclear powers agreed to renegotiate existing nuclear limitation agreements to provide for the elimination of all nuclear arsenals .
This has been India 's policy for decades , but it has been rejected by the United States and the other nuclear powers , which have insisted on the right to maintain their arsenals .
Fernandes , 68 , leads a small socialist party that is one of 14 in India 's ruling coalition .
He acknowledged that he had been a long-standing opponent of nuclear weapons , to the point of having participated in protests and sit-ins against nuclear arms in India and abroad when he was an opposition politician .
But he said that he could not accept the attitude of Western powers on nuclear issues , which seemed to be that they were responsible enough to handle nuclear weapons , while India and Pakistan were not .
`` I do n't know why India and Pakistan should be seen as blowing each other up , when nuclear weapons in the hands of the United States and China are seen as stabilizing factors , '' he said .
Referring to the nuclear standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cuban missile crisis of 1962 , he added : `` Even at the height of the Cold War , everybody kept their cool , even at the 11th hour .
Now to believe that this is a prerogative reserved to nations that have 10,000 nuclear warheads each , and not to nations that do n't even have a stockpile , that is unfair . ''
