ISLAMABAD , September 7 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Pakistan Tuesday categorically appealed to the international community , especially the major powers to refrain India from nuclear operationalization .
Addressing foreign reporters and diplomats here , Pakistani Foreign Secretary Shamshad Ahmad said the international community needs to respond `` in a coherent and determined way '' to arrest India 's `` dangerous plans for nuclear and conventional arms escalation . ''
His speech presented at the Institute of Strategic Studies of Pakistan was the first comprehensive response to India 's nuclear doctrine announced last month .
The doctrine envisages all-round nuclear capability to ensure a first strike survival and nuclear revenge which has met fierce criticisms from many countries including Pakistan and some major powers in the world .
According to Shamshad , the international community , particularly those major powers , need to press India to assure that it will not conduct further nuclear tests , operationally deploy its nuclear weapons or build hundreds of nuclear warheads as envisaged by its nuclear doctrine .
He put forward 10 requirements for India which include India should not produce or possess large stocks of fissile materials , create sea -based and submarine -based nuclear forces , acquire , develop or deploy anti-ballistic missile system and others .
Shamshad also stressed that India should seriously address and resolve the outstanding issues with Pakistan , specially the Jammu and Kashmir dispute , and enter into negotiations with Pakistan to elaborate a `` strategic restraint regime '' for South Asia .
`` Pakistan has alerted the major powers and other members of the international community to the danger posed by India 's nuclear doctrine which graphically sets out New Delhi 's political and military ambitions , nuclear as well as conventional , '' he said .
The foreign secretary blamed India for the conventional and nuclear arms race in the sub-continent , saying India aims to build offensive , and not defensive , military capability .
He warned against India 's additional nuclear tests .
`` If India does conduct further nuclear tests , this will , once again , oblige Pakistan to respond . ''
India exploded its nuclear devices in May 1998 , which was ensued by Pakistan 's similar tests in the same month .
Shamshad noted that `` certain preparations made by India last year to conduct additional nuclear tests have not been reversed so far . ''
He called on the world to press India to sign and ratify the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty -LRB- CTBT -RRB- and reverse `` the preparations it has made for further nuclear tests . ''
India had agreed to sign the treaty by this September , but it broke the promise on grounds of the upcoming general election .
Certain major powers have been repeatedly beguiled by India 's ambiguous assurances in its history of nuclear programs despite Pakistan 's cautionary advice , said Shamshad .
Turning a blind eye again to India 's `` dangerous plans and contentions '' will have `` grave implications , '' he warned .
Shamshad pointed out that India 's nuclear doctrine envisages some 400 nuclear warheads and the acquisition of other advanced weapon systems including high-performance fighter aircraft .
`` Pakistan will not follow India 's militaristic example , '' he said .
`` Pakistan will find ways and means to maintain credible nuclear deterrence against India without the need to match it bomb for bomb , missile for missile . ''
He made it clear that the increasing imparity in conventional fields with the continuous acquisition of sophisticated weapons by India will oblige Pakistan to rely more on its nuclear capability .
Answering a question , the foreign secretary hinted that Pakistan probably will not sign the CTBT by September , saying the circumstances free of coercion and pressure , or a complete lift of the economic sanctions on Pakistan imposed by western countries , have not yet been realized .
Moreover , the regional situation has drastically changed after the Kargil conflict and especially the announcement of India 's nuclear doctrine , he said .
`` We will not keep unmindful of the changed situation , '' he added .
