ISLAMABAD , November 25 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Pakistan Foreign Minister Abdul Sattar Thursday said the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty -LRB- CTBT -RRB- will not affect Pakistan 's `` inherent right '' to conduct more nuclear tests if necessary .
`` If India conducts another nuclear explosion before the CTBT enters into force , nothing in or outside can foreclose Pakistan 's right to do the same , whether it has signed the treaty or not , '' Sattar said here at a seminar on Pakistan 's response to Indian nuclear doctrine .
After the treaty enters into force , India 's more nuclear tests will explode the treaty itself and , according to certain provision of the treaty , Pakistan can withdraw form the treaty when such an `` extraordinary event '' happens , he further stated .
The foreign minister said minimum nuclear deterrence will remain the guiding principle of Pakistan 's nuclear strategy , but at the same time he hinted that the deterrence shall be sufficient .
`` The minimum cannot be quantified in static numbers .
The Indian build-up will necessitate review and reassessment , '' he noted .
`` In order to ensure the survivability and credibility of the deterrence Pakistan will have to maintain , preserve and upgrade its capability , '' he added .
However , Sattar reiterated that Pakistan will not engage in nuclear competition or arms race with India .
`` The Chief Executive , General Pervaiz Musharraf , declared on October 17 that his government will pursue a policy of restraint and responsibility , '' he recalled .
Furthermore , the foreign minister said Pakistan is still in favor of the CTBT , which it failed to sign , and will continue its efforts for reducing nuclear dangers in South Asia .
Out of the 44 states that possess nuclear weapons or have nuclear plants , Pakistan is one of the only three countries that have n't yet signed the treaty .
The other two are India and North Korea .
The treaty will take effect only after all the 44 countries sign and ratify it .
Twenty six countries have ratified the treaty but the two main nuclear powers -- the United States and Russia -- have not .
`` We did not sign the CTBT only because India 's opposition to the treaty raised suspicions about its intention , '' Sattar said , adding that the apprehension proved to be correct by India 's nuclear tests in May last year .
Despite enormous pressure from the U.S. and other countries , Pakistan conducted tests in the same month as a tit-for-tat response to India 's tests .
Deposed Pakistani prime minister Nawaz Sharif and his Indian counterpart Atal Bihari Vajpayee had both agreed to sign the CTBT by September this year , but the collapse of the Vajpayee government has made signing the treaty out of the agenda of both countries .
The Congress of the United States vetoed the proposal of ratifying the CTBT last month , which has further pushed the treaty into a mare of uncertainty .
The new Pakistani government led by General Musharraf , who led a coup on October 12 and dismissed the Sharif government , has no intention to take a precipitate decision on the CTBT , Sattar noted .
`` On a policy issue as important as the CTBT , domestic consensus is obviously a prerequisite , '' he added .
The foreign minister also disclosed that Pakistan has agreed to participate in negotiations on the proposed Fissile Material Cut -off Treaty -LRB- FMCT -RRB- .
`` Our predisposition is favorable '' in regard with the FMCT , he said .
