WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Officials are reviewing radar tapes tracking a terrifying two-minute plunge by EgyptAir Flight 990 as they try to determine whether mechanical failure or a criminal act may have downed the plane .
From 33,000 feet , the jetliner dropped nearly 14,000 feet in only 36 seconds early Sunday , investigators said .
Yet during that catastrophic plummet , the jetliner apparently possessed enough electrical power to broadcast its fast-diminishing altitude from its transponder , indicating to some aviation experts that it did not immediately break up even if its distress was instant .
Then , somehow , the plane 's descent slowed and after about 90 more seconds it crashed into the dark , cold waters of the Atlantic some 60 miles south of Nantucket Island , Mass .
The National Transportation Safety Board quickly assumed control of the investigation at the request of the Egyptian government , which normally would have taken the lead since the plane went down in international waters .
The only certainty was that the investigation would be neither simple nor short .
`` We are in the early hours of this investigation , '' said Jim Hall , the safety board chairman .
`` We do not know at this point what caused the crash . ''
President Clinton and other U.S. officials said there was no immediate evidence of terrorism , although that was being investigated as a possibility .
`` I think it 's better if people draw no conclusions until we know something , '' Clinton said .
The safety board dispatched a team of crash experts to Quonset Point , R.I. , designated as a command post for the investigation , as the FBI interviewed people who had access to the plane .
Egyptian officials rushed to help their American counterparts .
Radar tapes indicated the plane plummeted to 19,100 feet from 33,000 feet in the first 36 seconds .
Then , at least part of it continued to remain visible on radar for nearly a minute and a half .
The fall began just a few minutes after a routine voice communication from the cockpit .
In that first steep fall , the plane plunged at a descent rate of about 23,200 feet per minute , two to three times a standard emergency descent rate .
The continuing radar images after that could indicate an in-flight breakup , with smaller pieces drifting down more slowly .
Hall would n't say whether the radar tapes showed an aircraft in pieces .
In a Sept. 24 `` information circular '' obtained by The Associated Press , the Federal Aviation Administration said several U.S. agencies got letters in August warning `` a bomb or explosive device with ` spiral expansion ' would soon be used on a flight departing from either Los Angeles airport or New York 's JFK airport . ''
The alert had been in effect until Saturday .
Flight 990 left Los Angeles on Saturday and stopped at John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York , bound for Cairo .
The plane took off from Kennedy at 1 : 19 a.m. EST Sunday and disappeared from radar screens 33 minutes later .
At a news conference in Cairo , the head of EgyptAir , Mohammed Fahim Rayan , said he had no information about any direct threat against his airline .
Also , an FBI official , speaking on condition of anonymity , said the person who made the claim cited in the FAA memo was in prison and officials had no information the warning was related to the crash .
John Nance , an aviation analyst and veteran airline captain , said that if controllers knew the plane 's altitude during its drop , it would indicate the jet still had partial electrical power .
While radar locates a target in the sky , controllers do not know the identity of the blip or its altitude without information broadcast from the airplane 's transponder .
That broadcast can only be made with the help of electricity supplied by the plane .
A continuing electrical supply could help the investigation because it could mean the electric-powered flight data recorder and cockpit voice recorder kept operating during part of the descent .
`` Exactly what that means I do n't know , but it is an entirely different situation from TWA -LRB- Flight 800 -RRB- and Pan Am 103 , which had breakups and an immediate loss of power , '' Nance said .
The TWA plane blew up off Long Island , N.Y. , in July 1996 , killing all 230 aboard .
Investigators believe the plane 's nearly empty center fuel tank exploded .
A bomb destroyed Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie , Scotland , in December 1988 , killing 270 people on board and on the ground .
Robert Boyle , executive director of the Port Authority , which manages Kennedy airport , said the FBI was interviewing the flight crew that got off in New York -- replaced by another crew for the second leg -- as well as everyone who worked on the plane during its layover at JFK of just over an hour .
Investigators were also looking at the plane 's production and maintenance history .
The plane , tail number SU - GAP , was delivered to EgyptAir in September 1989 , Hall said .
It came off Boeing 's assembly line 10 years ago , shortly before workers went on strike , complaining of too much forced overtime .
The next plane off the line , a 767 for Austria 's Lauda Air , crashed in 1991 in Thailand when a system that slows the plane on the ground deployed in the air .
The company knew of no relationship between the two crashes but `` we 're going to look at every possible scenario , '' a Boeing spokesman said Sunday .
None of the items recovered from the plane in the first day 's search showed burn marks pointing to a possible fire or explosion on board .
Items included seat cushions , evacuation slides , clothing and passports .
