WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- The long and costly investigation into the explosion of TWA Flight 800 will conclude by this winter at the latest , the head of the lead investigative agency said Wednesday as the third anniversary approached .
Investigators are certain that a fuel-air explosion in the center fuel tank brought down the Boeing 747 on July 17 , 1996 , killing all 230 aboard , but a final determination of the ignition source still has not been made , Jim Hall , chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board , said in an interview with The Associated Press .
For the safety board , the investigation has been the longest and most expensive probe in its 30-year history .
Hall said he did n't yet want staffers diverting their time to tallying the cost , but `` it 's clearly going to be millions and millions of dollars . ''
Bernard Loeb , the panel 's head of aviation safety , said investigators have already examined the possibility of a static electricity buildup , stray current from nearby fuel pumps and electrical shorts in the tank 's fuel-quantity indicating system .
The final phase of their work is now focusing on possible electro-magnetic induction , which occurs when electricity from an active source or wire causes a trace of activity in a nearby wire .
Investigators have studied external sources such as radar-emitting military planes and ships .
They have also looked at carry-on items such as laptop computers and other personal electronics .
Now they are testing electronics built into the plane itself , although they have not ruled out any of the earlier possibilities .
`` We do n't favor any particular ways of getting ignition , but we know there are a number of them and the FAA has addressed some of them , '' Loeb said .
In directives issued since the crash , the Federal Aviation Administration has ordered a series of safety changes on a variety of airplanes .
They include new wiring checks on older aircraft , the installation of extra wire insulation and a prohibition on draining the center fuel tanks in 747s , a practice which can cause overheating in fuel-pump bearings .
Both Hall and Loeb indicated the five-member safety board will likely recommend further safety precautions when it holds its final meeting about the crash .
`` I 'm still hopeful that we will be able to have our final board meeting and final report by the end of the year , '' the chairman said as he sat in his office with binders about the crash nearby .
He said if there are delays , the meeting will occur by `` early winter . ''
The New York -to- Paris flight exploded in a clear evening sky shortly after takeoff from Kennedy International Airport .
The wreckage fell 13,000 feet into the waters off Long Island .
There were no survivors .
Over the following weeks , the Navy , FBI and other state , federal and local agencies mounted an extensive recovery operation and investigation .
It included checks for bomb-toting terrorists and eyewitness reports that a missile was seen streaking toward the jumbo jet .
Investigators also partially rebuilt the airplane in a hangar in Calverton , N.Y. , in their search for clues .
The relatives of the victims plan a series of remembrances over the weekend , including a memorial service and the dedication of a monument .
Both Hall and Loeb will attend and also deliver an investigation update to the families .
While some have speculated that the plane was blown out of the sky by terrorists or the military , the FBI concluded that no criminal act was involved .
On Wednesday , Hall adamantly repeated that the plane was not harmed by a missile .
`` Stories will probably continue past my lifetime , '' he said .
`` One of the board 's important roles is to protect the integrity of investigations and , in doing so , the integrity of the government we all work for . ''
