NEW YORK
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Richard Clarke is not a household name .
And the United States ' new anti-terrorism czar hopes it stays that way .
Clarke assumed his new job earlier this year after spending the last quarter-century battling terrorism on the international stage .
If he becomes recognizable , it probably means something went very wrong .
Clarke , 47 , welcomes the challenge .
`` I do n't think I could get out of bed in the morning if I was not motivated by something more than money , '' says the Boston -bred , University of Pennsylvania and M.I.T. -educated statesman who 's made anti-terrorism his career .
Clarke 's official title is national coordinator for security , infrastructure protection and counter-terrorism , a newly created federal position .
He already is working on a proposed dlrs 2 billion domestic defense plan , prepping 120 cities to fight terrorism .
`` I have a tough challenge , '' he acknowledged in an interview with The Associated Press during a recent visit to New York .
It was a rare step into the public spotlight for a man who prefers the shadows that often provide grist for fiction writers .
Clarke had been a Pentagon analyst and a key intelligence player at the State Department and the White House .
Watching the rise and fall of Libyan and Palestinian groups convinced him , he says , that terrorists never achieve their ultimate goals .
`` I think the groups after us now would be very wise to take the path other terrorist groups have taken : Get out of the business , get out of town , '' he says .
`` Stop coming after us , because you cannot win .
We are a big country .
We can take a lot of hits .
We can give back a hell of a lot more than they can send our way . ''
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">After the 1996 midair explosion of TWA Flight 800 -- investigated as a possible terrorist act -- the White House , law enforcement and the military realized the need for a federal coordinator to respond to a domestic terrorist attack .</ENAMEX>
Clarke , then special assistant to the president on terrorism , was selected .
His job : to coordinate the federal agencies responsible for defending against chemical or biological attack , mounting counter-terrorist maneuvers , and warding off possible computer assaults .
The need for such planning appears to have grown .
The FBI opened 68 investigations into the threatened or actual use of chemical , biological , radiological or nuclear materials last year , said a senior FBI official , Robert Blitzer , at a conference in Washington last week .
This year , more than 86 such FBI probes had been opened as of last month .
Clarke told the conference that Attorney General Janet Reno would unveil the new terrorism response plan this week and that it includes state and local officials .
Clarke is known among colleagues for his powers of persuasion .
He `` has a talent for overcoming interagency problems and making sure everyone is on board , '' said the deputy assistant director for counter-terrorism for the FBI in Washington , Dale Watson .
Says Clarke : `` The front lines of defense are the FBI on the streets , the CIA meeting sources in godforsaken countries , and the Delta Force guys training for raids .
I am back from the front line , trying to make it possible for them to do what they do . ''
When he entered government out of college , he worked to control the proliferation of nuclear weapons .
That ended when the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan in 1979 , touching off fears in Washington that the Soviets might want to march through to the Middle East .
Clarke soon found himself an expert on the region , with his expertise spreading quickly to include the Persian Gulf .
In the 1980s , he and colleagues crafted a campaign designed to stop Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi 's suspected sponsorship of terrorism .
The campaign included flying airplanes over Libya to create sonic booms and floating rafts onto its beaches to fake landings by commandos .
`` It seemed to me at the time that booms were better than bombs , '' Clarke said when asked about the campaign during a Senate Foreign Relations Committee hearing .
At the start of the Gulf War , in 1991 , Clarke headed the State Department 's political military bureau .
He accompanied Defense Secretary Richard Cheney and Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf to meet the king of Saudi Arabia and ask for permission to station troops there .
After the war , a bomb that killed six people and injured more than 1,000 at New York 's World Trade Center on Feb. 26 , 1993 , brought a new urgency to U.S. efforts to combat terrorism .
President Bill Clinton now wants Clarke to try new tactics , such as developing germ-warfare vaccines and battling terrorists in cyberspace .
Clarke has already begun identifying where the United States is vulnerable .
He helped devise a plan earlier this year to have a small team of hackers infiltrate the Pentagon 's computers , just to prove it could be done .
It worked -- too well .
In three days , the team had gained control of the national military command center computers .
`` If that can happen in the Pentagon , it can happen in power grids and communications , markets and banks , '' he said .
`` We are in a new era .
Warfare techniques have changed .
The nation that invests the money will win the next war . ''
Protecting cities against terrorism , Clarke said , is attracting some of the brightest minds in government -- much the way that efforts to control nuclear weapons once did .
`` Some people say you ca n't fight City Hall .
That is nonsense .
You can change things .
You can make a difference , '' he says .
`` In my own little way I try to make that difference .
And if you do the right thing , an embassy wo n't blow up .
People wo n't get killed .
The good guys will win occasionally . ''
