WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Two years after the ValuJet and TWA 800 crashes raised questions about safety , U.S. airlines closed out 1998 with a little noticed milestone : None of their 615 million passengers died in an accident .
It appears to be the first year since the dawn of commercial aviation for such an achievement .
There have been at least two other years when no one died in the crash of a U.S. jetliner , most recently 1993 .
But since the National Transportation Safety Board began compiling statistics in 1967 , such zeros have always been offset by deaths in smaller , generally propeller-driven commuter airplanes .
In 1998 , no passenger died in an accident involving a scheduled U.S. commercial airplane anywhere in the world .
That silent achievement stands in contrast to the public outcry after the TWA and ValuJet crashes in 1996 killed a combined total of 340 .
The same year a United Express commuter accident in Quincy , Ill. , killed all 12 aboard .
Government , aviation safety and airline officials were heartened by the latest news , but they were also quick to say that even in years when there are passenger deaths , the nation 's aviation system remains the safest in the world .
`` When there is an accident , it 's just by the grace of God whether there are a lot of people killed or not , '' said Stuart Matthews , president of the Flight Safety Foundation , an industry trade group .
`` The truth is , these are very random things . ''
FAA spokesman Les Dorr said 1998 's zero-fatality count `` was the result of the things that we and our industry partners have been doing every day to make sure that flying remains the safest form of transportation . ''
In April , the FAA , the airlines and the aerospace industry announced a goal to cut the aviation accident rate by 80 percent by 2010 .
Among the things they are targeting are crashes in which pilots become disoriented and fly perfectly workable planes into terrain around an airport .
Without that safety commitment , experts say , a coming boom in worldwide aviation could result in an airplane crash each week .
The safety drive comes two years after ValuJet Flight 592 plunged into the Florida Everglades , killing 110 , and TWA Flight 800 exploded off Long Island , killing 230 .
The crashes prompted criticism of the FAA and then- Transportation Secretary Federico Pena .
Investigators later traced the ValuJet crash to a cargo fire , prompting the FAA to order airlines to install systems that detect and fight cargo fires .
Investigators still do not know what caused the TWA explosion , but they suspect sparks from wiring around the plane 's center fuel tank .
That has prompted a series of new inspection orders for U.S. aircraft .
The National Transportation Safety Board deferred comment on the lack of fatalities , waiting for official confirmation from the FAA .
The airlines were pleased by the news , however .
`` When the final numbers are in , we expect we will have carried 615 million passengers last year , '' said David Fuscus , spokesman for the Air Transport Association , which represents the major airlines .
`` Without a fatality , that 's a wonderful statistic .
Zero fatalities have to be our goal every year . ''
The 1998 numbers do not include the Sept. 2 crash of Swissair Flight 111 off Nova Scotia , which killed all 229 aboard .
While that flight departed from New York bound for Geneva , it did not involve a U.S. carrier .
The figures also do not include a Nov. 4 incident in which a Northwest Airlines baggage handler was killed when she walked into the turning propeller blades of a commuter plane as it readied for takeoff in Memphis , Tenn .
The plane was carrying eight passengers , none of whom was injured .
The NTSB said the last time a passenger died in a U.S. airline accident was Dec. 28 , 1997 , when a woman suffered a fatal head injury after a United Airlines plane hit turbulence during a flight from Tokyo to Honolulu .
The last fatal commuter crash in NTSB records occurred on Nov. 8 , 1997 , when a Hageland Aviation Services Cessna 208B crashed in Barrow , Alaska , killing seven .
Preliminary figures show that 598 people were killed in general aviation accidents in 1998 , including crashes of private and corporate planes .
There also were 17 people killed -- 15 in Alaska alone -- in crashes of air taxis .
They are not scheduled airlines , but for-hire commercial airplanes .
