GENEVA
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
When Flight 111 crashed into the northern Atlantic last week , Swissair helped get journalists to the crash area , put its top executives on television and made caring for victims ' families a priority .
The response contrasted with that of TWA two summers ago , when its Flight 800 crashed off Long Island .
The American airline was criticized at the time for being insensitive to families , for giving top priority to investigating a terrorist attack and for being secretive with the press .
`` Swissair dealt with this much better than TWA , '' said Richard George of the New York -based Public Relations Society of America .
The airline made quick and open communications with the media a top priority -- second only to caring for relatives of the crash 's 229 victims .
The airline arranged for rapid transport , police protection and cash payments for families wanting to grieve at the site of the accident near the Canadian village of Peggy 's Cove , Nova Scotia .
But it also chartered planes to ensure that journalists could reach the area and used its public relations firm to help smooth things on the ground .
Swissair and manufacturers Boeing have already been served with a dlrs 50 million lawsuit by former boxing champion Jake LaMotta , who lost his son .
The lawsuit claims the companies should have known about wiring problems on the MD -11 aircraft -- a possible cause of the accident -- and did little to correct them .
In any case , Swissair is well insured .
Investors are therefore not unduly worried and the company 's shares have remained relatively stable .
`` The fact they handled everything so professionally helped restore consumer and investor confidence , '' said Janet Kinzler , European airline analyst at Credit Suisse First Boston in London .
As soon as news of the crash broke , the company 's top management appeared on live news conferences beamed around the world .
`` We have an emergency plan , of which communications are a very important part , '' said Swissair spokesman Peter Gutknecht .
`` The basis is to say everything we know as quickly as possible , and only give out the facts . ''
Jeffrey Katz , the American CEO of Swissair , traveled to Halifax to be on the spot .
Philippe Bruggisser , chief of the parent SAir Group , made repeated appearances on television , wearing a black ribbon on his lapel and choking back his emotions .
At Swissair 's Zurich headquarters , 12 people worked around the clock in the press department to field thousands of inquiries .
In New York , the public relations firm Hill & Knowlton helped with the overload of queries coming into Swissair 's U.S. offices .
The firm has a regular contract with Swissair .
In recent months , Swissair had trained more than 200 counselors to help relatives .
The effort was part of a family assistance plan submitted to U.S. authorities in June to comply with legislation passed to correct the TWA mistakes .
