NEW YORK --
Shortly after 4 : 30 a.m. on Oct. 31 , Lewis D. Schiliro , the top FBI official in New York , was awakened by a call from one of his deputies with the news that EgyptAir Flight 990 had crashed .
Schiliro says he immediately turned on CNN , worked the telephones , and then drove to Kennedy International Airport , where dozens of his agents were already fanning out to investigate .
While the scene was eerily similar to the bureau 's response to the Trans World Airlines Flight 800 crash in 1996 , this time the FBI has taken a secondary public role in the crash investigation , as the National Transportation Safety Board is directing the latest inquiry .
Monday , Schiliro made his first trip to Rhode Island , where the crash investigation and recovery effort is being directed .
He said by phone Monday night that he had observed `` what a phenomenal effort is taking place up here , '' adding that a resolution of the case is `` certainly not going to be easy . ''
Despite his visit and the involvement of hundreds of FBI agents in the inquiry , the low profile of both Schiliro and the bureau since the EgyptAir crash represents a startling change .
In 1996 , his predecessor , James K. Kallstrom , held daily briefings with the safety board after the TWA crash and became a familiar public figure .
Schiliro , on the other hand , has appeared at only two briefings this time around , even though his New York office is heading the criminal end of the inquiry .
To some extent , that low profile is characteristic of Schiliro , although he has granted interviews to reporters about the crash .
But Schiliro , a 24-year FBI veteran who has led some of the bureau 's most successful investigations into organized crime , terrorism and public corruption , says he believes the need to offer a public face is not as essential this time .
In 1996 , there was great apprehension about terrorism in New York , and hundreds of witnesses claimed they saw an explosion or even a missile hit the TWA jet .
There has been no evidence so far that points to a criminal act being behind the crash of EgyptAir Flight 990 .
`` What we 're trying to do is to deal in facts , '' Schiliro said Monday , `` and come to a justified conclusion based on those facts , as opposed to speculation and having to provide theories . ''
Schiliro , 50 , joined the bureau in 1975 and made a name for himself investigating organized crime .
After the crash of TWA Flight 800 in July 1996 , Schiliro spent nearly a month in Moriches , on Long Island , overseeing the effort to recover and identify bodies and airplane wreckage .
Since taking over the New York office in January 1998 , Schiliro has directed the bureau 's investigation of the embassy bombings in East Africa , allegations of Russian money laundering through the Bank of New York , and recent charges of corruption by food inspectors in the Bronx .
Schiliro said the experience of the TWA investigation had ultimately made for a `` much quicker response '' in the EgyptAir crash in `` knowing what to look for . ''
He said his agents and the safety board had been working closely and without problems .
Safety board officials have likewise praised the bureau 's role in the EgyptAir investigation .
`` I would say they 're not intrusive at all , '' Greg Phillips , the investigator in charge , said at one briefing .
`` I could n't be happier with the participation and support we 're getting right now . ''
Still , the sense that the safety board has dominated the public face of the investigation has spurred some debate .
FBI agents have appeared only sporadically at the safety board 's daily briefings on the crash , and once , it was reported last week , the chairman of the transportation safety board , James E. Hall , asked two bureau officials to stay away from the podium .
Kallstrom , who is now in the banking industry , said that he was concerned when he learned that the agents had been excluded .
`` That was just amateur night at best , '' Kallstrom said .
`` I thought it was inappropriate and highly political . ''
But Sen. Charles E. Grassley , R - Iowa , who has said the bureau hurt the safety board 's investigation of the 1996 crash , said that Hall 's exclusion of the officials showed `` that the FBI has gotten the message that they 're going to be in an advisory role , and helpful role to the NTSB . ''
Schiliro strongly defended the bureau 's work in the TWA investigation .
He said that given the swirl of speculation , there was a need for Kallstrom to `` stand up there and try to provide some answers . ''
And although Schiliro has willingly given newspaper and television interviews , he said his primary role would not be a public one for now , but would continue to be the pursuit of the answers the FBI is searching for .
`` I do n't have the answers , '' he said .
`` I do n't know why the plane went down . ''
