The Federal Aviation Administration Friday ordered the immediate inspection of the center fuel tanks of all Boeing 747s after the agency received reports that worn tank parts found recently in two jumbo jets could result in fire or explosion .
About 1,100 of the planes operating throughout the world are affected , but only 300 U.S. -registered 747s would have to be inspected as part of the FAA 's airworthinesses directive .
`` If not corrected , the condition could result in fire or explosion in the fuel tank during dry operation , '' the FAA said .
The directive is another in a series involving the safety of the 747 's fuel system that have been issued since TWA Flight 800 blew up in the evening sky off Long Island , N.Y. , in July 1996 .
Although the center tank of the TWA 747-400 was empty , the parts involved in the FAA directive were recovered from the ocean after the crash and were not found to be in a worn condition , the safety agency said .
The center fuel tank parts in question are the inlet check values and the jettison fuel pumps , which remove fuel from tanks .
The check valve has a flap which opens and closes as fuel is removed .
A part called an adapter goes into the pump and opens that flap .
Until inspections can be performed , the FAA ordered 747 operators to keep about 7,000 pounds of fuel in the tanks , which would be enough to cover the parts in question .
A Boeing spokesman said all the actions ordered Friday by the FAA had been previously recommended this year by the company in the form of service alert bulletins to 747 operators .
The FAA directive makes action mandatory .
During a recent inspection of the fuel system on a 747 , the operator discovered that the inlet adapters of the jettison pumps in the center tank were worn , the FAA said .
Two of the adapters had worn down enough to cause damage to another metal part .
The inlet check valves also had significant damage .
Another 747 operator reported damage to the inlet adapter that was so severe contact had occurred between the steel disk of the inlet check value and the steel screw that holds another metal part in place , the FAA said .
The worn and damaged conditions , which probably were caused by vibration , could spark an explosion if the tank were empty and contained vapors , the FAA said .
Operators of 747s in the U.S. fleet must perform the fuel tank inspections before planes accumulate 10,000 hours of time in service or within 90 days , whichever occurs first .
In addition , the FAA ordered that within two weeks certain 747 flight manuals must be revised to alert flightcrews about the dangers of operating jettison pumps without the 7,000 pounds of fuel in the center tank , pending inspection .
The estimated cost to comply with the directive would be about $ 216,000 for the entire U.S. fleet , the FAA said .
Friday 's action stems from the investigation into the TWA crash , which killed all 230 aboard .
National Transportation Safety Board investigators have determined that the center fuel tank exploded but they still do not know what triggered the blast .
One theory being investigated is that electricity from wiring around the Boeing 747 's center fuel tank could have sparked the explosion .
Since the crash , both Boeing and the FAA have issued service bulletins and airworthiness directives to conduct inspections , or to eliminate potential ignition sources in other Boeing aircraft such as the 737 that have fuel systems similar to the 747 .
