Moments after EgyptAir flight 990 suddenly , mysteriously dropped from the sky at about 1 : 50 Sunday morning , the complex -- but by now familiar -- search for a plane at sea , and for an explanation of why it went down , was under way .
Alerted by the Federal Aviation Administration when the plane disappeared from its radar screens , Coast Guard search planes and helicopters lifted off in darkness from Otis Air Force Base on Cape Cod at 2 : 15 a.m .
By late Sunday afternoon , four Coast Guard cutters and 11 planes were methodically criss-crossing a 36 square mile search area 60 miles southeast of Nantucket Island .
A `` Go Team '' of investigators from the National Transportation Safety Board -- the lead agency in the inquiry -- flew out of Washington as the nucleus of an investigation that will draw on a half-dozen federal agencies , including U.S. Navy deep-sea divers .
Two FBI agents were already aboard the Coast Guard ships supervising the gathering of debris that could be evidence .
`` We are beginning what may be a long investigation and we are prepared to do what it takes , '' Jim Hill , chairman of the safety board , told a news conference in outlining the initial steps .
In many ways the template for the investigation was set by the arduous investigation , still not fully completed , into the crash of Trans World Airlines flight 800 south of Long Island , N.Y. , in July 1996 .
But the TWA 800 investigation -- which developed into contentious clashes between the FBI and safety board investigators over whether the plane was brought down by terrorists or a mechanical failure -- has also apparently provided lessons of what not to do .
Ultimately , it was determined that fuel vapors in the nearly empty center fuel tank ignited in an explosion .
On Sunday , from officials at the White House to the investigators giving limited public briefings on the crash , there was much cautioning about not leaping to conclusions that terrorism might be involved , even though Egypt has a long history of fatal blows struck by Islamic fundamentalists .
And the FBI appeared to be deliberately keeping a low profile .
Indeed , when several high-ranking FBI officials arrived at the safety board 's news conference in Washington , Hill asked them not to appear on the podium .
`` We have no threats , we have no one claiming responsibility , '' said FBI spokesman Jim Davis , one of a number of agents who , publicly and privately , stressed that the FBI is routinely involved in the initial stages of these investigations in case it later turns into a criminal matter .
`` We have to follow the rules of evidence , the chain of evidence , '' said Special Agent Barry Mawn , who is supervising the Boston -based agents as they catalog the debris .
`` So we work that right from the get-go . ''
Behind the scenes , however , the FBI opened its Strategic Information and Operations Center in the J. Edgar Hoover Building in Quantico , Va. , a secure command center packed with classified computers and communications gear , an indication that the crash was regarded as a potentially serious matter .
A similar command center that houses the Joint Terrorism Task Force run by the FBI in New York was also activated , and agents in New York began to examine the passenger manifest and to question the workers at Kennedy Airport who might have had access to the ill-fated Boeing 767 carrying 217 people .
