SEATTLE --
After planning for two years to stage one of the biggest New Year 's Eve parties in the nation , Seattle officials Tuesday canceled their public celebration at the base of the city 's best known landmark , the Space Needle , citing security concerns .
Seattle has been on edge ever since riots broke out at the World Trade Organization meetings here three weeks ago , and the arrest on Dec. 14 of an Algerian man , Ahmed Ressam , who was carrying enough explosives to blow up a building .
Ressam , who was stopped at Port Angeles as he tried to enter Washington State by ferry , had booked a hotel room for one night near the Space Needle .
The authorities have said they have no evidence that Ressam was planning to blow up the 605-foot spire .
`` It 's a combination of things , '' said Mayor Paul Schell .
`` No other city has had a bomb delivered to its doorstep , or the kind of anxiety we 've had over the WTO meetings , plus Y2K concerns . ''
More than 50,000 people had been expected for the fireworks , concerts and arts shows on Friday night at the Seattle Center .
The annual fireworks show from the Space Needle will still go on , but the public will be barred from the 75-acre public area around the Needle beginning at 6 p.m. on Friday .
`` Although we are comfortable that Seattle is not a target , we cannot assure people that there is no risk , '' Schell said .
Contributing to the fears about security is a missing propane truck , stolen south of Seattle just before the trade meetings , city officials said .
`` That truck is still out there somewhere , '' said Vivian Phillips , a spokeswoman for the mayor .
`` It 's one of the concerns . ''
While other cities that plan to hold New Year 's Eve celebrations are going ahead with their plans , the cancellation of a party that was billed as the biggest civic celebration in a generation indicates that perhaps the greatest concern over the year 2000 is not computer glitches , but a fear of terrorism .
Asked whether Seattle 's cancellation might embolden terrorists into intimidating other cities , Mayor Schell said : `` Obviously , we took into account those who would say we would be giving in to terrorism .
But I 'm more concerned about the safety of our citizens . ''
Schell has been under heavy criticism for failing to provide adequate security at the WTO meetings .
Some demonstrators broke windows and looted stores , causing more than $ 2 million in damage .
More than 600 people were arrested .
This time , the mayor said he wanted to leave very little to chance .
`` We know there is funny stuff going on out there , '' he said .
`` The millennium , by its nature , is going to bring out the kookier fringe . ''
Officials in New York , Chicago and Washington , which also are planning major New Year 's Eve parties , were reluctant to criticize Seattle 's move , and said they had no plans to change their celebrations .
But , indirectly , Mayor Rudolph Giuliani of New York indicated disapproval .
`` I would urge people not to let the psychology of fear infect the way they act ; otherwise we have let the terrorist win without anybody striking a blow , '' Giuliani said .
`` No mayor , no governor , can offer anyone perfect security .
Life involves a level of risk . ''
New York is expecting upward of 2 million people for the celebration in Times Square .
More than 8,000 police officers will be on the streets , and city officials say they have taken extraordinary security precautions , including bolting down sewer manholes in the area .
`` This is New York , '' Mayor Giuliani said .
`` If you tried to cancel , probably instead of 2 million people showing up , 4 million people would show up . ''
Some of the fears have been stoked by statements from former intelligence officials .
Jim Kallstrom , the former agent of the FBI who was in charge of the investigation into the crash of TWA flight 800 off Long Island in July 1996 , recently urged people not to show up at the Times Square event .
`` If there is a terrorism strike , it will be in a large gathering , '' Kallstrom said .
In Washington , city and federal officials are proceeding with plans for the millennium celebration to be held at the Lincoln Memorial .
The evening 's festivities , at which the singer and actor Will Smith will be the host , will culminate in a midnight fireworks display set off by President Clinton .
The FBI has assisted Washington officials throughout the planning for the New Year 's Eve party , a spokeswoman for the mayor 's office said .
And members of the National Guard will supplement the 3,500 police officers patrolling the streets on Friday night , said Kevin Morison , a spokesman for the Metropolitan Police Department .
In Chicago , guests invited from every country in the world have started to arrive for the city 's millennial party , a dinner and fireworks display at McCormick Place , a lakefront convention center .
`` I can understand what they did in Seattle , '' said Lois Weisberg , an organizer of the party .
`` It 's too bad , because we have a combination of Y2K and terrorist threats making everyone cautious .
It really casts a pall over everything . ''
Las Vegas , which is expecting about 250,000 out-of-town visitors this weekend , has also stepped up security , although none of the major outdoor celebrations has been curtailed , city officials said .
