UNIONDALE , N.Y. --
When Trans World Airlines Flight 800 exploded and crashed off Long Island in July 1996 , killing all 230 people on board , some investigators initially theorized that the jetliner might have been brought down by a missile .
Among those who avidly pursued the theory -- to the annoyance of the FBI and the National Transportation Safety Board -- were a self-styled freelance investigative journalist , James Sanders , 53 , and his wife , Elizabeth , 52 , who trained TWA flight attendants and knew many of the crew members who died aboard the flight .
The couple , who live in Williamsburg , Va. , were seated Tuesday at the defense table in U.S. District Court here , charged by the federal government with conspiracy and aiding in the theft of a small piece of seat fabric from the plane 's wreckage .
Sanders , who ultimately wrote a book about the results of his own investigation , has said the fabric contains a red dye that proves the plane was hit by an errant Navy missile .
The government , which has dismissed the missile theory , says the red substance is fabric glue .
The trial is just one of many reverberations from the crash , which continues to hold a fascination for conspiracy theorists , half a dozen of whom were in the courtroom Tuesday for the opening arguments .
In his argument , the prosecutor insisted that the trial had nothing to do with the publication of Sanders ' 1997 book , `` The Downing of Flight 800 . ''
`` This is not a case about what caused the crash of TWA Flight 800 or whether their actions obstructed justice , '' said Assistant U.S. Attorney David B. Pitofsky .
`` It 's simply about their involvement in a conspiracy to remove parts of a plane involved in an accident . ''
In response , J. Bruce Maffeo , who is representing Sanders , told the jury that the prosecution 's case was `` much ado about nothing , '' and represented a continuing effort by the government to harass the couple .
`` Their only motive was to get at the truth , '' Maffeo said of the Sanderses , who are each free on $ 50,000 bond and face up to 10 years in prison if convicted .
Jeremy Gutman , a lawyer representing Mrs. Sanders , told the jury that his client had trained and worked with many of the crew members who died in the crash and that her only intent was to help find the cause of the explosion .
`` The government would have you believe that trying to find out the truth is a conspiracy , '' Gutman said .
Lawyers for both sides reminded the jury that no one had yet determined what caused the explosion and crash of the jet 12 minutes after it took off from Kennedy International Airport for Paris on the evening of July 17 , 1996 .
The Sanderses are charged under a relatively new federal law enacted by Congress in 1996 after a truck driver in Florida was accused of taking a piece of plane wreckage from the May 1996 Valujet crash as a souvenir .
The law makes it illegal to remove , conceal or withhold parts of a civil aircraft involved in an accident .
Among those in the courtroom supporting the Sanderses Tuesday were several people who said the government was conspiring to suppress the truth about the crash .
`<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">` The is a terrible miscarriage of justice , '' said William S. Donaldson III , a retired Navy crash investigator and attack pilot , who said during a break in the proceedings that he had proof the jetliner was brought down by a Chinese -made , shoulder-launched rocket fired by a terrorist .</ENAMEX>
`` I 've sent a 130-page to the Congress last July , but the government wants to suppress the truth , '' he said .
`<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">` The White House sent out over 1,000 agents after the crash to prevent the public from finding out it was done by terrorists . ''</ENAMEX>
Pitofsky told the jury that he planned to present 10 to 12 prosecution witnesses , including a former TWA pilot , Capt. Terrell Stacey , who he said helped obtain the seat fabric from a government hangar in Calverton , on Long Island , where investigators had reassembled the wreckage of the plane .
He said that Stacey had admitted to taking the plane part and giving it to Sanders .
`` He 'll also tell you how he agreed to supply Jim Sanders with confidential documents . ''
Pitofsky told the jury .
`` Captain Stacey will take you step by step and tell you about his and the defendants ' participation in the scheme . ''
Pitofsky said Stacey had agreed to testify in exchange for a lesser charge , theft of government property , a misdemeanor .
During Tuesday 's proceedings , the Sanderses held hands , occasionally exchanging reassuring smiles .
`` We have done nothing wrong , '' Sanders said as they left the courthouse late in the afternoon .
`` This is nothing more than a case of government oppression . ''
