WASHINGTON --
Some government experts who worked on the investigation of the explosion of TWA Flight 800 told senators Monday that the FBI had ignored them , mishandled evidence and suppressed their conclusions .
But the FBI agent who had been in charge of the inquiry denounced the congressional proceeding as `` a kangaroo court . ''
The witnesses told an oversight subcommittee of the Senate Judiciary Committee Monday that James K. Kallstrom , the agent in charge of the FBI 's New York office , withheld a report written by another agency , the Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco and Firearms , that said that the center fuel tank of the 747 had exploded , apparently for mechanical reasons .
Sen. Charles Grassley , the chairman of the subcommittee , said that `` FBI leadership , in the case of TWA Flight 800 , was a disaster . ''
He said the bureau , with a blind fixation on finding evidence of a bomb or missile , lacked the skills necessary to investigate a plane crash , and , more disturbingly , the ability to coordinate with others .
Kallstrom , in a telephone interview , sharply criticized the hearings and said he was sorry he had not been allowed to testify .
He said his exhaustive hunt for clues of a possible terrorist attack had fulfilled his promise to the families of the 230 people who died , and to the public .
He pointed out that at the time of the crash , July 16 , 1996 , a bomb had just exploded at a park in Atlanta , where the Olympics were beginning , and a terrorist , Ramzi Ahmed Yousef , was on trial in a plot to blow up American jets over the Pacific .
Grassley 's press secretary , Jill Kozney , said the committee had asked the FBI for Kallstrom 's testimony a week and a half ago , but that the FBI had said Kallstrom would not be available because he was giving a commencement speech Monday .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">A key matter of disagreement among investigators is the status of a report prepared by fire and explosion experts from the Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco and Firearms , known as ATF , that concluded that the TWA explosion appeared to be caused by a mechanical flaw in the center fuel tank .</ENAMEX>
The FBI , in response to a subcommittee request , produced a March 1997 cover letter from Kallstrom to James E. Hall , the chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board , that it said was transmitted with the report .
But the letter is not signed , and Senator Grassley expressed doubt that it had ever been sent .
FBI officials testifying Monday said it had , and Kallstrom said he had forwarded the report within a day or two of receiving it .
Safety board officials say they have no record of having formally received the report , although they acknowledge having got a copy `` over the transom . ''
In any case , the cover letter was hardly generous to the experts who prepared the report .
It said , `` The publication of this unsolicited and premature report by the ATF violates the agreement made by them regarding their participation in this investigation . ''
It was , the cover letter said , `` an extraordinary violation of investigative protocol . ''
Kallstrom , now an executive with a bank in Delaware , said Monday , `` The only problem I had with the report was we were n't done with the investigation ; we were nowhere near finished .
`` The center fuel tank blew up , we all agreed with that , '' he said .
`` To reach the conclusion that it was not criminal , with tons of wreckage still in the water , after we gave our word to victims ' families that we were going to do everything possible , well , we were n't at 70 percent of doing everything possible . ''
Grassley said the FBI 's reluctance to give up on the bomb or missile theories had made it hard for the safety board to persuade the Federal Aviation Administration to take corrective steps , but safety board officials were not clear on that point .
Three investigators testified that they were sometimes shoved aside by the FBI , and they criticized the bureau 's approach to the case .
A safety board metallurgist , Frank Zakar , said the bomb or missile idea was `` dominant from the very beginning '' with the FBI But two FBI officials who testified said the investigation had gone so well that it was a model for the future .
Donald M. Kerr , the assistant director of the FBI laboratory division , said that the ATF report could have turned into a problem if a terrorism suspect had been arrested , because a defense lawyer could have used it to cast doubt on a prosecutor 's argument .
