Forget Hannibal Lecter , Dracula , Blair witches and that ill-tempered shark in `` Jaws . ''
This investigative thriller will scare you to death .
The scenario : The country is on a tense security alert after receiving classified intelligence reports that the Iranian government is planning major terrorist attacks against the United States .
A U.S. airliner mysteriously explodes and plunges into the Atlantic , killing all aboard .
Eyewitnesses raise the specter of a missile attack .
Within hours of the crash , the president has ordered the `` dusting off '' of a military strike plan that will be set in motion if it is determined that state-sponsored terrorists brought down the plane .
While the country refines its major retaliatory action , the FBI launches a sweeping investigation to find the cause of the crash .
The most frightening thing about this scenario is that it 's true .
`` In the Blink of an Eye '' is the riveting account of the FBI 's marathon investigation of TWA Flight 800 , the New York -to- Paris jumbo jet that crashed three years ago off the coast of Long Island .
Author Pat Milton , a New York -based Associated Press correspondent , calls it the most mysterious aviation disaster in U.S. history .
Believe her .
TWA Flight 800 carried 230 people to a horrific death when its central fuel tank exploded shortly after takeoff from Kennedy International on the night of July 17 , 1996 .
There were no survivors .
Likewise , there was no hint of trouble in the moments before the explosion .
The precise cause of the disaster remains a mystery despite an exhaustive investigation by the FBI , Federal Aviation Administration , National Transportation Safety Board and Boeing , which built the doomed 25-year -old 747 .
The most haunting aspect of the crash : 270 eyewitness accounts of a missilelike streak in the sky before the explosion .
A terrorist attack ?
Friendly fire ?
Did a bomb destroy Flight 800 ?
Was it sabotage ?
Or could it have been simply a fatal mechanical failure ?
In the course of a 16-month , $ 20 million investigation by authorities , Milton says more than 700 FBI agents pursued 3,000 leads , interviewed 270 eyewitnesses and conducted 7,000 interviews .
Four hundred divers made more than 4,000 dives to recover a million-plus pieces of wreckage scattered across the ocean floor .
Incredibly , experts reconstructed more than 85 percent of the plane in a hangar at the small farming town of Calverton on the north shore of Long Island .
Meanwhile , a dedicated FBI team relentlessly chased down leads , explored theories and pursued suspects , often while slashing through political grandstanding , interagency bickering and bureaucratic nonsense .
The team was headed by Jim Kallstrom , former assistant director of the FBI , who emerges as a savvy , cool , competent and compassionate leader .
Although Kallstrom 's team failed to pinpoint the exact cause , Milton reveals , the FBI showed `` with a high degree of certainty that neither an act of terrorism nor friendly fire brought down the plane . ''
But if not a missile , what did 270 eyewitnesses see that July evening ?
The CIA provided an answer after correlating its accounts with Flight 800 's cockpit recorder and sensors from U.S. spy satellites that had captured the final explosion of the plane .
`` The CIA , '' Milton explains , `` concluded that the eyewitnesses had not seen a missile but had witnessed the crippled plane itself in various stages of breakup after the center fuel tank had exploded . ''
Because sound travels so much slower than light , witnesses saw streaks of burning debris before hearing the explosion , causing the misslelike illusion .
Still , among the scariest revelations in Milton 's book is the vulnerability of the U.S. commercial airline industry to acts of terror or error , which the author relates in chilling detail .
As an AP reporter , Milton followed the story from start to finish .
In her book she writes with the skill and power that comes only with meticulous research , the respect of the victims ' grieving family members and the hard-won trust of well-placed and highly credible sources .
Clearly , she earned the confidence of Kallstrom and his FBI colleagues , some of whom shared their most intimate thoughts , emotions and conclusions with her .
On the first anniversary of the crash , Milton puts Kallstrom on the beach at Long Island for a memorial ceremony at which he is reflecting on events of the year .
`` To have worked so hard and come up with no cause , no culprits , was a great frustration '' to Kallstrom , she writes .
`` But there was something more , something the agents could not fully express but that Kallstrom understood : In pursuit of the truth , man 's love for his fellow human beings was perhaps the only sure truth that had been found in this disaster . ''
Milton calls it `` an ennobling truth , a truth that embraced them all . ''
-- Title : In the Blink of an Eye : The FBI Investigation of TWA Flight 800 Author : Pat Milton Type : Investigative reporting Publisher : Random House , $ 26.95 -- -LRB- Visit the Star - Telegram 's online services on the World Wide Web : www.star-telegram.com -RRB- nn
