OAKLAND , Calif. --
Whatever brought down Alaska Airlines Flight 261 is only half of the airline 's problem .
The other half is in its maintenance hangar here , where workers and supervisors sign their initials to thousands of work orders as they complete them .
In at least a few cases , according to the Federal Aviation Administration , they may have signed papers approving work that they did not do .
When the agency finds violations , it levies civil penalties .
But in this case , in an unusually harsh follow-up , federal prosecutors convened a grand jury .
Even before the airline got a formal notice of the modest $ 44,000 fine the agency was proposing , the hangar here got a visit from the FBI .
`` They came in with guns drawn , flak jackets and everything else , '' John R. Fowler , Alaska Airlines ' executive vice president for technical operations , said in a voice of dismay .
In the kind of enforcement action that is almost unheard of in aviation , federal agents seized the records of several of Alaska Airlines ' MD -80s .
The first raid was in 1998 , and covered three planes ; the investigation has continued , and last November the records of eight more planes were seized .
Prosecutors have brought at least 10 of the airline 's mechanics before a grand jury .
At the hangar here , where Alaska Airlines maintains its 34 MD -80s , the investigation comes at a time when the company is in shock over the crash of one of its planes off the Los Angeles coast , which killed all 88 people aboard .
The cause of that crash is not known , but it appears to involve the mechanical failure of a part of the tail , the horizontal stabilizer .
-LRB- On Saturday , the FAA reported that Alaska Airlines had found four planes with suspected damage in the mechanism that moves the horizontal stabilizer , and that Delta Airlines had also found four ; Air Tran , the airline formerly known as ValuJet , found two , and five airlines found one plane each : American , Continental , TWA , Northwest and Hawaiian Air . -RRB-
It was a company mechanic , John Liotine , a former president of the mechanics union , who sparked the investigation 15 months ago with a complaint to the FAA .
He had been hired in 1989 , when the hangar here was bought by the airline , and worked as a lead mechanic , supervising a handful of others .
He complained about work on three planes being done out of sequence , or not done at all , in a rush to return them to service .
Although some of his assertions are known in detail , the company professes not to know exactly what the government is investigating as the inquiry drags on and expands .
Asked what the planes have in common or what the mechanics are being asked , Karen A. Gruen , a company lawyer , simply turned her palms up .
-LRB- The plane that crashed was not one of those covered by the investigators ' subpoenas . -RRB-
Gruen and other executives said that after the crash they wanted to dispel the idea that there was any connection between the charges and the crash of Flight 261 .
There is no obvious connection , but it is hard to know for sure because the cause of the crash is still unknown .
Government officials are not talking about the scope of their criminal investigation of the airline .
Todd Zinser , the Transportation Department 's assistant inspector general for investigations , would not comment on the specifics of the case .
Neither would spokesmen for the FAA or the U.S. Attorney 's office in San Francisco .
But Zinser said that to justify criminal prosecution , violations must be knowing and willful , and that prosecutors generally take into account the rank within the company of the people accused of violating the law .
Because the Alaska inquiry has not produced any indictments , the only indication of what is happening comes from a sketchy notice of violation from the FAA and documents from the agency 's inquiry .
They include statements by Liotine , the mechanic who first reported the violations to the FAA .
He told the agency that other mechanics had signed their names to work cards indicating they had done work on three planes although they had not actually done the work .
In one case , for example , as mechanics rushed to finish work on an MD -80 , he observed that managers and mechanics were filling out a so-called Post -maintenance final run checklist before all the checks had actually been carried out .
He removed the card , he said , and asked that the mechanics start over .
A new card was produced and filled out , he said , but by a mechanic not qualified to taxi the plane or check the engines .
Airline officials said that some of the accusations involved misunderstandings of the paperwork system at the hangar .
On another airplane , Liotine complained , the throttle knobs for the two engines were out of alignment , and he filled out a form that should have led to them being fixed .
Instead , a supervisor `` cleared '' the entry from the aircraft log by noting that previous tests had found the throttles acceptable .
An FAA inspector , alerted by Liotine , wrote in a report that the supervisor `` proceeded to ` sign off ' the throttle split discrepancy just written in the aircraft maintenance log , without actually performing any maintenance to correct the discrepancy ! ''
But airline executives now say that while this was not the proper procedure , it was not illegal .
Some people on the shop floor said they were not sympathetic to Liotine .
`` This individual was a fanatic ; he wanted it perfect , '' said John Kelly , Liotine 's fellow mechanic .
Alaska Airlines , which traces its roots to the 1930s , flies an extensive system on the western edge of the continent , from northern Alaska to Mexico .
The company is well regarded in the industry for having developed new satellite -based navigation techniques for landing in treacherous Alaskan mountains , among other innovations .
It has also had some prior run-ins with the FAA .
For example , when one of its MD -80s developed a fuel leak , the airline drained and sealed the tank and assigned the plane to shorter routes .
The agency said the modification was improper and proposed a $ 250,000 fine , later settling for $ 125,000 .
The company , in a statement that it plans to release on Monday , asserts that Liotine was trying to slow maintenance down as a pressure tactic during contract negotiations , and was bitter about having been passed over for promotion .
Liotine , who has declined to talk to reporters , has denied in statements to the FAA that any of his charges was a negotiating tactic .
He was president of the mechanics union at the time he made the charges , but the union later removed him from office .
Union officials did not return phone calls seeking comment .
