AUCKLAND , New Zealand
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Trying to stabilize troubled relations , President Clinton and Chinese President Jiang Zemin ordered a swift resumption of frozen trade talks Saturday but ran into sharp differences over China 's threats against Taiwan .
Jiang said China reserves the right to use force to thwart any independence move by Taiwan , 100 miles offshore from the mainland .
Clinton expressed sympathy with China 's irritation at Taiwan but warned Beijing would face `` grave consequences '' if force were used .
Attending a summit of Asia - Pacific leaders , Clinton also increased pressure on Indonesia to invite U.N. peacekeepers to restore security in violence-wracked East Timor .
Clinton underscored his point by suspending more than $ 100 million in arms deals with Indonesia .
Other trouble spots awaited Clinton on Sunday before the opening of the annual meeting of the 21-member Asia - Pacific Economic Cooperation forum .
Clinton was to meet with South Korean President Kim Dae -jung and Japanese Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi to discuss North Korea 's possible test of a new long-range missile .
Clinton also was to see Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin about allegations of corruption , as well as economic and arms-control issues .
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright , at a dinner with Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov , urged Moscow to cooperate fully with American efforts to fight money-laundering by Russian organized crime , a U.S. official said .
Opening the first New Zealand visit by an American leader since Lyndon Johnson in 1966 , Clinton immediately went on a shopping spree with his daughter , Chelsea , and mother-in-law , Dorothy Rodham .
Shaking hands with well-wishers as he walked , the president stopped in a chocolate store , a glass gallery and an outdoors store , where he bought a sweater that Chelsea helped him pick .
Clinton and Jiang met for more than an hour in their first face-to-face talks in 15 months .
Smiling , they shook hands at the suggestion of photographers .
Reporting on the talks , the president 's national security adviser , Sandy Berger , said the two leaders , after 6 1/2 years , `` have learned to deal with each other through good times and bad .
And as a result , I would consider the relationship between our countries now back on track with , of course , many challenges still facing us . ''
Clinton and Jiang ordered aides to resume market-opening negotiations aimed at allowing China to achieve its long-sought bid to join the World Trade Organization , the influential body that sets the rules for global trade .
The trade talks were suspended in April when Clinton rejected a package of Chinese concessions as insufficient .
Tensions were inflammed further by the accidental NATO bombing of the Chinese embassy in Yugoslavia on May 7 .
Berger said the bombing came up in the talks only once -- when Jiang mentioned it as having been an obstacle to trade talks -- and that Clinton `` did not raise it or speak to it . ''
Gene Sperling , chairman of Clinton 's National Economic Council , said China 's entry entry to the WTO could occur by year 's end , although he stressed : `` There was no time line set .
But I think through the discussions was a serious recognition that sooner is better than later . ''
Jiang cautioned Clinton not to ask for too much from China .
`` China is universally recognized as a developing country .
We can never accept terms that exceed our economic capacity or prejudice the national interest , '' Jiang said .
Differences over Taiwan proved the most contentious issue .
Jiang sharply criticized Taiwan 's president , Lee Teng -hui , who stirred concern in Beijing and Washington by his retreat from a long-standing formula underpinning eventual unification between China and Taiwan .
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhu Bangzao said Jiang called Lee `` a troublemaker '' and `` the stumbling-block in the improvement to China - U.S. relations . ''
Berger said Clinton said Lee `` had made things more difficult for both China and the United States '' and reafffirmed the United States ' `` one- China '' policy , which does not recognize Taiwan as an independent nation .
But he warned Jiang against using force , urging him instead to pursue a peaceful settlement through dialogue .
Jiang told Clinton he wanted a peaceful solution but that Lee `` had made that more difficult , '' Berger said .
Jiang urged Clinton to discontinue U.S. arms sales to Taiwan but the president said he would continue to provide defensive weapons on a case-by-case basis .
`` Jiang ended this by saying , ` You know I 'm not someone who likes war but 1.2 billion Chinese people are concerned about what has happened in Taiwan , '' Berger said .
