KUALA LUMPUR , Malaysia
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
In a boost to its bid to join the World Trade Organization ahead of China , Taiwan 's economics minister said Friday that top officials from the United States and Australia had strongly supported its membership .
Wang Chih -kang , an official in Taiwan 's delegation at the Asia - Pacific Economic Cooperation forum , said he received the support during meetings Friday with U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky and Australia Trade Minister Tim Fischer .
Barshefsky said Taiwan 's entry to the WTO should be based on market , rather than political , considerations , Wang told reporters .
He said Fischer told him the WTO would n't be a `` complete organization '' without Taiwan .
China considers Taiwan a renegade province and has long asserted sovereignty over the island .
Taiwan and China have remained divided since the Communists took over the mainland in 1949 , forcing the Nationalist government to flee to Taiwan .
Since then , Taipei has engaged in an aggressive campaign to gain privileges enjoyed by independent nations , such as membership in the United Nations and other world bodies .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">China insists that Taiwan must n't be allowed into WTO before its own entry , but Beijing 's efforts to achieve that have made little progress in recent months .</ENAMEX>
Wang did n't speculate when WTO membership might be possible for Taiwan , but said it was `` very pleased '' that another top U.S. official had offered support for its bid without political strings attached .
Earlier this week , U.S. Energy Minister Bill Richardson visited Taipei and said its entry into the WTO would make sense .
The United States is Taiwan 's second largest investor .
Trade between the two sides is valued at dlrs 50 billion .
Although Taiwan is one of APEC 's 21 members , it must refer to itself as `` Chinese Taipei '' during the group 's summits and is the only country that is n't allowed to send its leaders to the meetings .
Those steps are taken to meet the demands of China .
