WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Barring new snags , President Clinton and Chinese President Jiang Zemin will make a major effort to get derailed trade talks back on track when they meet on the sidelines of an Asian - Pacific conference in New Zealand .
Both sides want to repair the severe damage done this year to Beijing - Washington ties .
And improving trade relations is in the interest of both countries , say officials from both sides and trade analysts .
Informal trade talks between officials from the two countries on China 's long-sought bid to join the World Trade Organization are likely to begin even before the Clinton - Jiang session in Auckland on Sept. 11 , the officials said .
`` We hope at a minimum we can have the two leaders talk about the importance of the WTO accession agreement for China , '' said David Leavy , a White House national security spokesman .
Of course , avoiding new snags is the key .
Recently , the relationship has been plagued with little but snags .
First , there were Republican outcries over campaign contributions to Clinton 's re-election campaign by Chinese interests .
Then came a bipartisan House report documenting alleged widespread Chinese espionage at U.S. nuclear labs .
Then , on May 7 , the United States accidentally bombed the Chinese embassy in Belgrade .
Last month , U.S - China ties came under further strain when the president of Taiwan advocated a change in the relationship between his island and the mainland , suggesting relations henceforth be `` state to state . ''
China viewed that as a move toward Taiwanese independence .
It considers Taiwan a renegade province and has said it would use force , if necessary , to block independence .
The United States maintains unofficial links to Taiwan under the Taiwan Relations Act , which authorizes the sale of defensive weapons to the island and pledges to treat threats with concern .
The law is deliberately vague on the question of whether U.S. forces would help defend Taiwan .
But despite the elevated rhetoric across the Taiwan Strait , there have been optimistic words from both China and the United States on using the New Zealand meeting to mend fences .
`` Obviously we hope that this meeting can be the occasion for significant progress on WTO , '' said Stanley Roth , assistant secretary of state for Eastern Asian and Pacific affairs .
The WTO is the Geneva -based organization that oversees and sets rules for international trade .
U.S. businesses see China 's entry as important to opening Chinese markets .
For China , it also could mean new markets -- and an end to the annual , emotional debate in Congress over renewal of normal trade relations .
But China has n't been able to join the WTO because of U.S. demands that it first liberalize its markets .
The two countries almost reached a deal in April , during a visit to Washington by Chinese Premier Zhu Rongji .
The Chinese made a number of market-opening concessions .
But Clinton , bowing to pressure from Congress , refused to approve a deal .
He claimed China had to do more to protect U.S. steel and textile companies and open its market to American financial service firms .
Then came the embassy bombings -- and China froze the trade talks .
Some hard liners in China remain opposed to resuming trade talks with the United States , just as many U.S. congressional conservatives oppose closer relations with Beijing .
Thus , both presidents must walk a careful line .
China wants to join the trade organization , but there 's a limit to the price it will pay .
`` I personally believe that China is already qualified to ascend to the WTO , '' Li Zhaoxing , the Chinese ambassador to the United States , told a news conference .
`` I hope our American friends will not further raise the threshold . ''
One Democratic official close to the talks said Clinton and Jiang would not use the meeting to hammer out an agreement -- but would only act if they could seal the deal .
Thus , some U.S. officials , including U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky , were flying to Auckland after Labor Day and ahead of the Clinton - Jiang meeting in hopes of seeing their Chinese counterparts to prepare the groundwork .
It remained to be seen whether Clinton and Jiang would be able to announce a final market-opening trade agreement .
`` Right now it 's a dance because of the embassy bombing , '' said economist Lawrence Chimerine of the trade-oriented Economic Strategy Institute .
`` I know the Chinese leadership still wants to do it and I know our government wants to do it . ''
At the very minimum , U.S. officials were hopeful that Clinton and Jiang could announce that formal talks could resume .
-- EDITOR 'S NOTE -- Tom Raum covers national and international affairs for The Associated Press .
