BEIJING
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Talks between Chinese and EU trade leaders focused Thursday on key issues of China 's entry into the World Trade Organization .
EU trade commissioner Pascal Lamy met again with his Chinese counterpart , foreign trade minister Shi Guangsheng , after meeting Wednesday with Premier Zhu Rongji to discuss opening China 's long-closed markets .
Though the EU has billed the meetings as a positive sign , officials sought to dampen expectations for a speedy agreement .
`` The fact that we met Zhu this early on in the process is a reflection of the importance that both sides attach to what we 're doing , '' Lamy spokesman Anthony Gooch said following Wednesday 's meetings .
Also Wednesday , Zhu told President Clinton 's top security adviser , Sandy Berger , that the election of a new , independence-minded leader in Taiwan had placed U.S. - China relations at an `` important , if not critical , juncture , '' Chinese leaders have grown suspicious of Washington 's intentions toward Taiwan and are particularly worried about possible sales of sophisticated warships and anti-missile defenses to the island as well as proposed U.S. legislation to formalize ties with Taiwan 's military .
China sees unification with the island , which split off 51 years ago amid civil war , as a cherished national goal .
Berger was in Beijing for two days of meetings to appeal for Chinese restraint following the election of Shui -bian , whose party advocates formal independence for Taiwan .
Ahead of the March 18 election , Beijing threatened to use force against Taiwan , fueling tensions with Washington , which maintains close , though unofficial , ties with the island .
Reunification with Taiwan and WTO entry are key , though potentially conflicting , goals of the current Chinese communist leadership .
U.S. lawmakers friendly to prosperous , democratic Taiwan , have warned that Chinese threats against the island may prompt them to block moves vital to implementing Washington 's agreement with Beijing on WTO entry .
After 14 years of trying , China has made joining WTO this year a priority .
It hopes the rules -based WTO regime will bring in foreign investment and force long-protected state industries to make reforms they have resisted .
Zhu intervened at critical moments during China - U.S. negotiations in November , helping forge a market-opening deal that cleared Beijing 's biggest hurdle to joining the WTO .
China still needs to reach separate agreements with eight WTO members , the 15-nation European Union foremost among them .
Lamy joined the talks in Beijing this week to help deal with thorny political issues blocking a final agreement that the sides say they hope to reach during the talks .
He opened Tuesday 's session with Chinese foreign trade minister Shi Guangsheng and the pair met again for nearly two hours Wednesday , following the Zhu meeting .
They met again Thursday morning .
Both sides have started to discuss the `` nitty gritty of the political issues , '' Gooch said .
Neither side has publicly detailed the obstacles to the agreement .
EU officials , speaking on condition of anonymity , have said Europe wants greater access to China 's automobile , insurance and telecommunications markets and more licenses for insurers .
Negotiators are pushing for more concessions than China granted the United States last November , although Chinese officials have hinted they would be hard-pressed to allow that .
The U.S. pact gives foreign companies the right to own up to 50 percent of Chinese telecommunication companies and secures wider access for foreign insurers and bankers , who are now limited by tight geographical restrictions and an erratic licensing process .
