GENEVA --
While international attention has been focused on Beijing 's effort to join the World Trade Organization , Taiwan has quietly been moving ahead with its own application .
Representatives of the island , which Beijing considers a renegade province , met formally with trade organization delegates Wednesday to advise them on Taiwan 's progress in complying with the market-opening requirements to be admitted to the 134-member group that makes the rules for international trade .
The Taiwan representatives said their administration had essentially fulfilled the requirements .
Unstated , however , was the crucial question of whether Taiwan will be able to join before the Chinese government in Beijing , which is at a much less advanced stage in the application process but has insisted that it must be admitted first .
Taiwan 's bid could be completed in July , trade organization officials said .
But an approval of its application could develop into a diplomatic confrontation , inflaming the already delicate situation in which China has been avidly seeking admission to the trade organization for a dozen years .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Its recent efforts have been complicated by the accidental American bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade only weeks after Prime Minister Zhu Rongji lobbied heavily during a trip to the United States to clear the way for China 's acceptance into the WTO. While Beijing officials have suspended human rights and other discussions with the Clinton administration to protest the bombing , analysts have noted that they did not cut off trade talks , which are a high priority for the rapidly growing economy .
Beijing is almost certain to protest if Taiwan gains entry first .</ENAMEX>
The issue could result in an effort by China 's allies among developing countries , which make up the majority of trade organization members , to block Taiwan 's admission .
All actions at the trade regulatory body are supposed to be taken by general agreement among all member countries .
That includes the admission of new members .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">However , Taiwan 's bid could force a vote in the already splintered world trade body , which has been at very public odds in recent weeks over who will be named its next director general .
China 's supporters argue that a 1992 `` China first '' statement agreed to by the trade organization 's predecessor , the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade , requires that Beijing gain admission before Taiwan .</ENAMEX>
Taiwan has always maintained that both applications should be evaluated on their merits , and the United States supports that view .
Taiwan 's negotiator , Yi Fu Lin , said Wednesday that `` our opinion has been that the two accessions are dealt with separately . ''
Under the Nationalist government , since overthrown and moved to Taiwan -- where successors are still in power -- China was among the 23 original signers of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade .
But Chinese membership lapsed after the Communist revolution of 1949 .
Since 1986 Beijing has been seeking to rejoin the trade forum .
