WASHINGTON --
The House voted overwhelmingly on Tuesday to expand military ties between Taiwan and the United States , a move that China and the Clinton administration warned could escalate regional tensions and jeopardize a landmark trade agreement .
The bill , approved by a bipartisan vote of 341-70 , calls for the United States to establish direct military communications between Washington and Taipei , expand American training of Taiwan military officers and conduct an annual review on threats to Taiwan 's security .
While the provisions of the Taiwan Security Enhancement Act are more symbolic than substantive -- American administrations have been empowered to provide Taiwan with military aid for more than two decades -- moving toward more formal military relations with Taiwan could have damaging diplomatic consequences with China .
If enacted , critics said , the bill would upset Washington 's deliberately ambiguous `` one China '' policy that treats Taiwan as a part of China and recognizes Beijing as China 's capital , but also allows the United States to provide Taiwan with defensive weaponry .
`` It would bring about very serious damage to China - U.S. relations , '' Yu Shuning , a spokesman for the Chinese Embassy here , said in a telephone interview .
Opposition from Republicans and Democrats last fall had forced the bill 's sponsors to strip out its most contentious language , including authorization to sell Taiwan specific weapons like missile defenses , air-to-air missiles and diesel-powered submarines .
With those changes in mind , 140 Democrats felt free on Tuesday to join 200 Republicans and 1 independent in saluting Taiwan 's democratic government and its formidable lobby here .
`` This is far less confrontational than the original legislation , '' said Rep. Sam Gejdenson of Connecticut , the senior Democrat on the House International Relations Committee .
Administration officials said they were saving their lobbying effort for the Senate , where the watered-down version still faces stiff opposition , and possible defeat .
Sen. Trent Lott of Mississippi , the majority leader who is a strong supporter of Taiwan , urged caution against complicating U.S. - China relations .
`` We should proceed with due diligence , '' he said .
President Clinton 's national security aides have advised him to veto the measure if Congress approves it , arguing that it goes well beyond the 1979 Taiwan Relations Act .
That measure allows the United States to arm Taiwan with defensive weaponry and implicitly commits Washington to defend Taiwan against any attack .
The administration had backed up its commitment to Taiwan in recent years .
The Pentagon dispatched two aircraft-carrier battle groups to the Taiwan Straits in 1996 after China fired missiles toward Taiwan .
Between 1994 and 1998 , Gejdenson said , the United States approved $ 2 billion in arms to Taipei .
But the timing of this bill is a major headache for the administration , especially as American officials have tried to mend relations with China since the bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade last May .
`` This bill would mandate a number of new security and military arrangements with Taiwan that could create dangerous , false and inaccurate expectations on both sides of the Taiwan Straits , '' said an administration policy statement .
But an influential Taiwanese lobbyist said Tuesday 's vote would play well among all major candidates in Taiwan 's presidential elections next month .
`` Symbolically , Congress has sent a very strong signal to the people of Taiwan that the U.S. is committed to their security , '' said Wenyen Chen , president of the Formosan Association for Public Affairs , a lobbying group for Taiwan here .
Tuesday 's vote followed nearly two hours of sometimes sharp debate on the House floor .
Supporters , led by Rep. Tom DeLay of Texas , the majority whip , said the measure clarified and reaffirmed Washington 's commitment to Taiwan 's security in the face of a growing Chinese military buildup .
`` Given the volatility of the situation in the Taiwan Straits , any mixed signals by our government can easily be read by the Communist Chinese as complacency , '' DeLay said .
Rep. Dick Armey of Texas , the majority leader , said , `` If we truly love freedom , we must protect democratic Taiwan . ''
But critics said the bill was unnecessary and counterproductive , and could create a new barrier to a vote later this year on granting China permanent trade benefits .
`` It will do nothing , repeat , nothing to enhance Taiwan 's security , '' said Rep. Tom Lantos , D - Calif .
`` It will stir up a hornet 's nest in the region . ''
Rep. Amo Houghton , R - N.Y. , said , `` Our policy is effective , it 's worked for 21 years , why are we changing it now ? ''
Supporters of the Taiwan bill disputed fears by some lawmakers that the measure could imperil the vote on China 's trade benefits , a step American and Chinese negotiators agreed to last November that cleared the way for China 's entry into the World Trade Organization .
`` Friends of Taiwan should have no fear of our greater trade with China , just as those who want more trade with China should not object to us helping Taiwan , '' said Armey .
Even before Tuesday 's vote , trade was on the minds of congressional leaders who met with Clinton at the White House to discuss the budget .
Armey said Republicans and Democrats agreed to hold the China vote as early as possible , before election politics gets in the way .
`` Probably it would be more difficult later in the year because politics gets more intense later in the year and politics can screw up a bowling ball , '' Armey said at his weekly news conference .
But congressional leaders cautioned that it may be difficult to call up the bill before May because of ongoing trade negotiations between the European Union and China , and because Congress will have to hold hearings on the issue before it votes .
Senior Republicans stressed to Clinton that he needed to step up his efforts to convince House Democrats to vote for the measure if he wants to see China become a member of the World Trade Organization .
Supporters are trying to muster at least 100 votes among the 211 House Democrats .
Jake Siewert , a White House spokesman , said Clinton has already started working to win the China - WTO vote .
In addition , the business community has started its own $ 6 million lobbying campaign to get the measure approved .
Earlier in the day , Lott predicted that the trade vote will pass if conditions are right .
`` I think we 're going to do it , '' Lott said at a U.S. Chamber of Commerce breakfast .
`` But China 's going to have to watch its conduct .
And the president 's going to have to weigh in aggressively with the Democratic leadership . ''
