SHANGHAI , China --
Chinese and European Union trade negotiators broke off talks in Beijing Thursday on China 's entry to the World Trade Organization , further complicating the country 's troubled bid to join .
No date has been set for the talks to resume .
`` The gap has narrowed , but we are not there yet , '' the EU team leader , Hans - Friedrich Beseler , said in a statement .
An EU spokeswoman described the talks as having `` broken down '' in their fourth day .
China 's chief negotiator , Long Yongtu , said the two sides had `` come very close , '' the official New China News Agency reported .
China 's attempt to join the organization has dragged on for 14 years .
Last year , the United States and China agreed to membership terms , but China must reach similar agreements with all WTO members before it can join .
India signed a WTO deal with China on Tuesday .
China still has a good chance of entering the organization this year , despite the slow progress .
A more imposing threat to its membership is growing opposition in the U.S. Congress , which must grant China permanent normal trade relations in order for the United States to benefit from the terms of China 's eventual WTO membership .
And congressional support has eroded because of resistance from organized labor and rising tensions between China and Taiwan .
China can technically enter the WTO regardless of a congressional vote , provided it reaches an accord with the EU and other members , WTO officials say .
Both the United States and Cuba are WTO members , for example , despite trade restrictions between the two countries .
But WTO officials say China has so far indicated that it will not join if it is not freed from the annual U.S. review of its trade status , a vestige of sanctions leveled on China after its crackdown on pro-democracy protesters in 1989 .
An agreement with the Europeans , meanwhile , is still within reach .
`` We remain committed to a deal with China at the earliest available opportunity , '' Anthony Gooch , a spokesman for the European Union , told a news conference in Brussels Thursday after talks ended .
European diplomats say unresolved issues include the extent to which foreign telecommunications companies will be allowed to provide services in China , constraints on the number of business licenses and geographic coverage granted foreign insurers , and the extent to which China 's market will open to European agricultural and food products .
`` The issues are the 20 percent that have n't been covered in the U.S. agreement , '' said a European diplomat in Shanghai .
In some cases , the Europeans are seeking to clarify areas left vague by the U.S. talks , in particular regarding current foreign investment in Chinese telecommunications networks .
Companies as diverse as Sprint Corp. and FranceTelecom made such investments through a complex holding structure .
But China later declared those investments illegal and demanded they be unwound , basically nationalizing millions of dollars in foreign telecommunications investment .
Under the deal struck with the United States , foreign companies eventually will be allowed to own up to 49 percent of fixed line and mobile telecommunications networks , and many industry executives hoped that would resolve the dispute .
But China has since offered a different interpretation , insisting that the existing investments are still illegal .
This is an issue that is very important for the European Union because there are some European companies involved and they want a better arrangement , the diplomat said .
In other cases , the EU is pushing for concessions the United States was unable or unwilling to achieve .
The Europeans want China to allow foreigners to hold controlling stakes in telecommunications networks , for example .
And they want more business licenses for European insurers .
China has granted licenses to only 14 foreign insurers , including five U.S. companies and five European companies , but some U.S. companies hold more than one license .
They also want foreign insurers to be allowed to sell group insurance beyond the two cities in which such sales are allowed now .
Group insurance , covering employees at China 's state enterprises , for example , is the most promising segment of the Chinese insurance market .
The Europeans also want China to drop trade barriers to British gin , Scotch whiskey , French cheese and other items not covered by the accord with the United States .
Despite the breakdown in talks , European diplomats and business executives noted that China 's negotiations with the EU only resumed in January after having been suspended last year pending an agreement with the United States .
They said the talks have not yet moved beyond technical details of the issues involved .
