BEIJING --
The head of the World Trade Organization said Friday that he was optimistic that China can enter the trade body this year .
`` I 'm extremely hopeful that negotiations will be concluded and agreed by the various members this year , '' said Mike Moore , chief of the trade organization , at a news conference here Friday afternoon .
Moore met with China 's prime minister , Zhu Rongji , and the foreign trade minister , Shi Guangsheng .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Moore also made clear that China must enter the WTO before Taiwan does .
China , which considers Taiwan a renegade province , has warned that any efforts to secure Taiwan 's earlier entry would cause a serious confrontation .</ENAMEX>
Moore said the issue was settled in 1992 by the predecessor organization , the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade , which said China would join first , then Taiwan .
A WTO official who spoke on condition of anonymity said that Taiwan 's reported fear that China , once in the body , could keep Taiwan out , was unjustified , Reuters reported Friday .
The official said there would be a 30-day period after China ratifies its accession before it becomes a member .
During this period , the official said , Taiwan could sign its own accession documents .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">To placate Chinese concerns about granting Taiwan national status , the island will enter under the name `` China - Taipei , '' with the status of a `` customs territory , '' officials of the trade group have said .</ENAMEX>
China still needs to reach agreements with 14 trade organization members before it can join .
It has already reached agreements with the United States , Japan and Canada , and on Monday negotiations with the European Union will resume here .
The Europeans are reportedly pushing to deepen the concessions China has made to the United States in the areas of insurance , telecommunications and automobiles , an official said .
Concessions granted to one party , like the European Union , apply to all member countries .
Trade officials believe that once the major economic powers reach accords with China , the remaining countries , mainly Latin American and Asian , will quickly come to terms .
Two or three months of technical negotiations among member countries are then expected at the WTO headquarters in Geneva .
Topics would include phase-in periods of new rules for China and the elimination of non-tariff barriers not already covered .
Chinese and international trade officials are nervously watching the congressional debate on granting China permanent normal trade relations status , as President Clinton has proposed .
A stiff battle is expected this spring .
In theory , China can join the WTO even if Congress refuses to cooperate , and Congress could renew China 's trade status each year .
But a negative vote in Congress on permanent trade relations would cause uncertainty and confusion , international trade officials say , leading China to deny benefits to the United States that it grants to other countries , or even to delay its accession to the world body .
