HONG KONG , May 26 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Professionals from various sectors attended a seminar here Wednesday afternoon , discussing the impacts of the Chinese mainland 's entry into the World Trade Organization -LRB- WTO -RRB- on Hong Kong .
Their major topics centered on how the Hong Kong industrialists and businessmen get everything ready in face of new opportunities and new challenges after the mainland 's entry into the WTO .
Delivering a welcoming speech at the seminar , Herbert Liang , president of the Chinese Manufacturers ' Association of Hong Kong , said China 's accession to the WTO will benefit the expansion of its imports .
At present , nearly half of the mainland 's products are exported via Hong Kong .
Increasingly expanding the mainland 's foreign trade will bring benefits to Hong Kong 's trade , shipping , banking , insurance and other sectors of the services industry .
At the same time , he said the mainland will accelerate the opening of its market in services industry , which will provide Hong Kong enterprises with opportunities of investment in the mainland 's industries of finance , retail sales , foreign trade and telecommunications .
Liang said the mainland 's accession to the WTO may probably lead to a new upsurge in attracting more foreign investment .
It is expected that a mediate role that Hong Kong is playing for the transnational corporations and Taiwan -funded enterprises to enter the mainland market will be surely strengthened .
Good opportunities will bring about intense competitiveness .
Therefore , it is necessary for Hong Kong industrialists and businessmen to get everything ready ahead of time and make full use of its unique advantages both in geography and traditional culture and of their rich experience for doing business , he said .
Liu Shanzhai , deputy director of the Xinhua News Agency Hong Kong Branch , said that China takes a positive attitude toward its entry into the WTO and its stand on this issue remains unchanged .
However , he said China will never give up its principles or sacrifice its state fundamental interests for the sake of joining the WTO .
No country is allowed to demand an exorbitant price in this issue .
Otherwise , it will not benefit the stable growth of China 's economy , nor the process of global economy , he said .
Speakers at the seminar included Edward Yau , deputy general of Trade , and Joseph Tsang , assistant chief economist of the Hong Kong Trade Development Council .
