WASHINGTON , August 13 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- <ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">A senior Chinese diplomat said here Thursday that China should be allowed to join the World Trade Organization -LRB- WTO -RRB- before Taiwan gains membership .
Ambassador Li Zhaoxing told a gathering of the World Affairs Council of Washington , DC , that in line with the regulations and principles of the WTO , Taiwan , as part of China , should not be given the access first .</ENAMEX>
`` The regulation of the principle of the WTO is explicit itself , that is , only when the sovereign state becomes a member of the WTO could it become possible for part of that state to apply and become a member of that distinguished World Trade Organization , '' he said in reply to a question on Taiwan 's WTO membership .
The United States had been negotiating with both the mainland of China and China 's Taiwan Province on their admissions to the WTO. The U.S. Trade Representative 's Office announced last week that it had concluded its bargaining with Taiwan , giving rise to speculations that Taiwan might be allowed to join the organization before the mainland is given the green light .
China has stated that it wants to become a WTO member as a developing country , but the United States believes that China 's economy is too big to join on such a term .
Washington 's announcement last week was seen as being designed to put more pressure on China to make more concessions .
`` The Taiwan issue is an issue concerning our national sovereignty and territorial integrity .
I believe the peaceful reunification of the motherland is a common aspiration of the 1.2 billion Chinese people , including our compatriots in Taiwan , '' Ambassador Li said in a live television questions and answers session .
`` Taiwan became part of China at least 2000 years ago , and it is still so .
And under this principle , anything , including political party matters , could be discussed between the two sides of the Taiwan Straits .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">But the One - China principle is a must , '' added Li , who assumed his post in March after serving for years as China 's deputy foreign minister </ENAMEX>.
He first made a 30 minute speech focusing on President Bill Clinton 's late June trip to China , where he announced the `` Three No 's '' on Taiwan : no support for two Chinas or One China One Taiwan ; no support for Taiwan 's independence ; and no support for Taiwan 's admission to any international organization which consists of sovereign states .
Responding to criticism from conservative Congressmen , the Clinton Administration said that such explicit expression was designed to promote peaceful dialogue across the Taiwan Strait .
`` After long separation of Taiwan from the Mainland , naturally there is still a sort of lack of understanding .
But I sincerely believe , as millions and millions of people from Taiwan now are visiting the mainland , year in and year out , -LRB- that -RRB- mutual understanding too will be enhanced , '' Ambassador Li said .
Beijing has proposed starting political negotiations with Taiwan in order to terminate political confrontation .
It is also suggested that protocol issues be worked out to pave the way for political talks .
Ambassador Li said : `` I believe if the Chinese people have the opportunity to handle this issue themselves without being interfered with by outside forces , we can get ahead and we can move on with success . ''
