Zeng also pointed out that the NPC and its standing committee will continue to step up anti-corruption legislation in the future .
In that regard the NPC and its standing committee have adopted a decision to crack down on economic crimes and additional regulations on punishing criminal offences such as bribery , graft and smuggling , added a special chapter dealing with graft and bribery to the Criminal Law , and formulated an administrative supervision law and an administrative penalty law .
The spokesman also told the conference that China is making full preparations to join the World Trade Organization -LRB- WTO -RRB- , and is studying related laws and regulations on foreign trade and investment to adapt its legal framework to new requirements .
In response to a reporter 's question about the NPC Standing Committee vice-chairman Cheng Kejie , Zeng said Cheng is suspected of being involved in activities violating the law and discipline and is now reflecting on his own problems while being investigated .
Cheng has asked the NPC and its Standing Committee for a leave , Zeng said , adding that the NPC Standing Committee , after a discussion , proposed approving of his request for absence from the NPC session and agreed that he does not become a member of the NPC Presidium .
`` Everyone is equal before law and whoever violates laws will be punished , '' Zeng said .
Cheng , 67 , of Zhuang nationality , was deputy secretary of the CPC Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Regional Committee and chairman of the regional government before he assumed the position of chairman of the Ninth NPC Standing Committee in March 1998 .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">On the Taiwan issue , Zeng said the so-called Taiwan election on March 18 must not have consequences that will lead possibly to the separation of China such as `` Taiwan independence '' .
`` Change of leaders in the Taiwan region cannot change the fact that Taiwan is part of China , '' he said .</ENAMEX>
The recovery of Hong Kong and Macao has made the task of resolving the Taiwan question and realizing a complete reunification of the motherland stand out even more prominently as a sacred mission of the Chinese people , Zeng said .
`` We will , as always , adhere to the basic principles of ` peaceful reunification ' , ` one country , two systems ' and the point proposal on developing cross- Strait relations and promoting a peaceful reunification of China put forward by President Jiang Zemin , and continue to work hard to promote a peaceful reunification of the motherland , '' he said .
`` We hope that the Taiwan authorities will not run against the historical trend and will not create obstacles for the development of cross- Strait relations and reunification of the motherland , '' he said , stressing `` if confronted with any serious separatist activity aimed at undermining China 's sovereignty and territorial integrity , we will not sit idle . ''
`` We hope that the two sides across the Taiwan Strait can conduct dialogue on the premise of ` one China ' and develop healthy relations , '' he said .
