UNITED NATIONS
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
The United States was briefing the Security Council on Friday on its decision to bomb suspected terrorist targets in Afghanistan and Sudan , which it has defended according to its right to self-defense under international law .
The deputy U.S. ambassador , Peter Burleigh , was to explain President Bill Clinton 's reasoning before the 15-member council , diplomatic sources said .
On Thursday , U.S. Ambassador Bill Richardson defended the military strikes in a letter to the Security Council president that said the strikes complied with international law and the rights of states to self-defense under the U.N. charter .
Repeated threats by Osama Bin Laden 's terrorist organization left Washington `` no choice but to use armed force to prevent these attacks from continuing , '' Richardson wrote .
He cited Article 51 of the U.N. charter , which states that nothing `` shall impair the inherent right of individual or collective self-defense if an armed attack occurs against a member of the United Nations . ''
The article requires member states report any such actions to the Security Council .
Clinton said U.S. forces carried out the strikes in retaliation for the bombings linked to bin Laden at U.S. embassies in Nairobi , Kenya and Dar es Salaam , Tanzania , which killed over 250 people .
`` The targets struck , and the timing and method of attack used , were carefully designed to minimize risks of collateral damage to civilians and to comply with international law , including the rules of necessity and proportionality , '' Richardson wrote .
In April , Richardson travelled to Afghanistan , where the Saudi -born Bin Laden lives , and received a promise from Taliban leaders to keep him `` under wraps '' and prevent him from using Afghanistan as a base for terrorist activities .
`` It is the sincere hope of the United States government that these limited actions will deter and prevent the repetition of unlawful terrorist attacks on the United States and other countries , '' Richardson in the letter to council president Danilo Turk of Slovenia .
`` We call on all nations to take the steps necessary to bring such indiscriminate terrorism to an end . ''
