MEXICO CITY
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Mexico 's former ambassador to the United States , Jesus Silva Herzog , says he is considering running for mayor of Mexico City next year for the governing party , newspapers reported Wednesday .
`` I am ready if the rules are reasonable ; I am ready to risk it , '' he was quoted as saying .
The comments appear to end speculation that he might quit the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party , or PRI , to run for the presidency as head of an opposition alliance .
Mexico 's most famous novelist , Carlos Fuentes , recently suggested such an alliance with Silva Herzog as its candidate and the politician has been holding meetings with opposition leaders in recent weeks .
But on Tuesday he met with Francisco Labastida , the leading PRI candidate for president next year and hinted at support for him .
-- BUENOS AIRES , Argentina -LRB- AP -RRB- -- Argentina 's opposition Alliance has unveiled a platform for October presidential and general elections vowing to tackle corruption and unemployment .
The plan , unveiled at an independence day rally Tuesday and published Wednesday , vowed to achieve progress in education , combat crime and crack down on corruption .
It offered few specifics for achieving such goals .
`` My job as president will be to investigate government corruption and put corrupt people in jail , '' said Buenos Aires Mayor Fernando de la Rua , the alliance 's presidential nominee .
The opposition group is made up of the centrist Radical Civic Union and the left-of-center Frepaso party .
-- MANAGUA , Nicaragua -LRB- AP -RRB- -- The U.N. World Food Program said Wednesday it has asked Nicaragua to investigate a possible black market in products donated to help victims of last year 's Hurricane Mitch .
Olaga Moraga , spokesman for the agency , said it wanted to investigate reports raised by local newspapers that donated canned fish and bags of milk meant for children had appeared in a local marketplace .
It was not clear how widespread the problem was .
Moraga said the program had distributed more than 5,500 tons of food to more than 400,000 people affected by the hurricane .
-- BUENOS AIRES , Argentina -LRB- AP -RRB- -- Thousands of people on Wednesday inaugurated the new headquarters of a Jewish community center on the site where the previous one was destroyed by a terrorist bomb in 1994 .
The July 18 , 1994 car bomb attack left 86 people dead and some 300 injured .
Relatives held up candles and photographs of the victims during Wednesday 's ceremony inaugurating the new AMIA community center , a 20-story building of solid cement .
Israel has long contended that pro- Iranian terrorists were behind both the Jewish center attack and the 1992 bombing of the Israeli embassy here , which claimed 29 lives .
Tehran has repeatedly denied the claims .
Authorities had detained the man who sold the vehicle used as the car bomb , but have made no direct arrests in the investigation .
