NEW YORK
-LRB- AP -RRB- - A Brooklyn man accused of helping an Algerian try to smuggle explosives into the United States pleaded innocent in Manhattan , as an alleged accomplice appeared in a Canadian court .
On Thursday , Abdel Ghani Meskini pleaded innocent in U.S. District Court in Manhattan to charges of providing and concealing support for Ahmed Ressam , an Algerian national accused of trying to sneak explosives into the United States just before New Year 's .
Several hours later , Meskini 's lawyer , Roland Thau , sought to dispel rumors his client was cooperating with investigators , saying Meskini had n't spoken to law enforcement officials since Thau began representing him , a few hours after his Dec. 30 arrest .
Thau said prosecutors have told him Meskini , 31 , made statements after the arrest , adding it was possible that `` cops coerced some kind of statement from him . ''
Another alleged accomplice , Mokhtar Haouari , 31 , appeared in Superior Court in Montreal on Thursday for the start of court proceedings aimed at bringing him to New York .
He has been indicted on the same charges as Meskini .
Thau said any statement made by Meskini would likely have been to declare his innocence or explain why he traveled to Seattle the week Ressam was arrested in Port Angeles , Wash .
Ressam was arrested Dec. 14 on explosives smuggling charges after he allegedly tried to smuggle timing devices and a powerful demolition explosive called RDX into Washington from Canada .
The arrest increased fears of terrorism planned to coincide with millennium celebrations , but no such attack materialized .
Ressam was formally indicted on federal terrorism conspiracy charges by a Seattle grand jury on Thursday .
In court papers , federal prosecutors allege Haouari asked Meskini to travel to Seattle to meet Ressam .
The indictment against Haouari and Meskini accuses them of conspiring since October 1997 to support members and associates of a terrorist group .
Haouari allegedly provided various forged identification documents while Meskini went to Seattle to assist Ressam .
So far , court documents and statements by authorities have not indicated exactly what the alleged terrorists had planned to do , or how many of them were involved .
Suspects in the case have been linked to the Armed Islamic Group , known by its French acronym GIA .
According to documents filed in Montreal courts , Haouari said he fled to Canada in 1993 because he was wanted by military police in Algeria over his involvement with the fundamentalist Islamic Salvation Front .
He said he left the group in 1992 because `` it is against my principles and religion to use any form of violence . ''
In denying bail to Haouari on Thursday , Judge Jean - Guy Boilard ruled that evidence indicated Haouari was a member of an Algerian terrorist group and was involved with Ressam in a plot to bring explosives into the United States .
The United States `` seems to have credible proof implicating the accused , '' the judge said .
`` The proof that has been revealed satisfies me that he belongs to a terrorist organization , '' Boilard said .
The judge also said Haouari posed a flight risk , given his history of using false documents and credit card fraud .
