ATLANTA --
Yesterday the subject of this column was denial , as it works within the first family and on a national scale .
The subject does not seem to be exhausted by any stretch .
A certain form of denial , it can be argued , is sometimes necessary in a nation 's affairs .
After seeing a movie about a president who stages a `` war '' to deflect attention from a sex scandal , a lot of people had to do a double take when news hit of strikes on suspected terrorist sites in Afghanistan and Sudan .
To say this invites cynicism about Bill Clinton 's motives could not , obviously , be more of an understatement .
Republicans such as Sen. Dan Coats of Indiana quickly questioned the motives of the attack .
Yet it 's a safe bet many Americans , enough to carry the weight of public opinion , will for at least a short time put aside their quite reasonable misgivings and support the action , as did House Speaker Newt Gingrich .
Call it patriotic denial .
A great national chat session will , of course , commence over whether the deepening Monica Lewinsky crisis was a factor in the decision to strike .
As cynical as this may seem , it might be better to hope it was .
The Lewinsky story has a global reach -- the immediate response from a Sudanese spokesman was that the strike on Khartoum was an attempt to deflect attention from the president 's troubles .
So some measure of calculation about the effect of the story , and the degree to which it may have emboldened terrorist groups to carry out atrocities like those in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam , surely entered into the decision to launch the attacks Thursday .
Whether the root of his calculation is his own interests or the nation 's , Clinton 's decision to order these strikes involves considerable risk .
The president and Defense Secretary William Cohen both alluded Thursday to an imminent threat of more attacks by the group connected to renegade Saudi millionaire Osama bin Laden .
-LRB- Were those threats , by the way , related to a perception that the Starr investigation of Clinton makes the country more vulnerable ? -RRB-
While one purpose of the attacks may have been to attempt to pre-empt more terrorism , however , they are certain only to redouble the zeal for reprisal against the United States by the terrorists .
Any degree of success on their part is going to raise questions about the advisability of Clinton 's decision .
It 's part of the never-ending irony of these days that Clinton in his speech Thursday afternoon could be so frank about global affairs after failing to achieve this in his brief message about personal matters Monday night .
The war against terrorism will be `` a long , ongoing struggle , '' the president said , and one in which the United States will `` remain a target . ''
Presidents have made sober pronouncements about terrorism before , but these words represent a new realism -- how odd to find those words , after `` Wag the Dog , '' after the events of this week -- about what the country will have to endure .
It will be a long struggle , longer than the term of this president , however long that turns out to be .
Tom Baxter is a political columnist for the Atlanta Journal - Constitution , Atlanta , Ga .
