WASHINGTON --
With security being tightened after the arrest of an Algerian man who crossed the Canadian border into the state of Washington with powerful bomb-making materials , President Clinton 's national security adviser warned Americans on Sunday to be more vigilant over the next few weeks because of a `` heightened risk of terrorist actions . ''
While the State Department has issued similar warnings in recent weeks for Americans traveling abroad during millennial celebrations , Sandy Berger , the White House 's ranking security aide , broadened the caution Sunday .
`` We 're not aware of any other specific threat against particular targets in the United States , and obviously if that changes we 'll alert the American people , '' Berger said on the CBS program `` Face the Nation . ''
`` But I would think that as Americans go about their plans for New Year 's , they simply should be vigilant . ''
For example , he said , `` If they see something suspicious , or see packages or activities that they think are unusual , they should obviously let law enforcement people know . ''
For several weeks , American officials have been walking a careful line between urging citizens to exercise prudence on the one hand , while on the other hand not seeming alarmist .
But while security forces have been put on alert in American cities that are planning millennial celebrations , the main concern has been overseas , because intelligence agencies have said they have `` specific and credible '' information that Americans abroad are being targeted by extremists .
Even without other such evidence about the risks of an attack in the United States , the arrest in Washington state has prompted tighter security at the borders .
Berger said that investigators had so far been unable to discern the motives , plans and possible affiliations of the Algerian , Ahmed Ressam , who was arrested last week after he crossed the border by ferry into Port Angeles , Wash. , driving a car filled with the ingredients for a powerful bomb .
The car carried nitroglycerin , urea powder and timing devices that officials said were capable of being used in a bomb that could have caused substantial damage to an office building or a crowd of people .
Berger said that Ressam was being investigated for possible ties to a wide range of terrorist groups , including the organization headed by Osama Bin Laden , the exiled Saudi millionaire who lives in Afghanistan and is accused of being behind the bombings of two American embassies in Africa last year .
Some officials have said that Ressam may have had affiliations with the Islamic Armed Group , a terrorist organization that operates primarily in North Africa and Europe .
Officials in Montreal , where Ressam had lived , reported that they had discovered evidence that he might have shared an apartment with Karim Said Atmani , who was extradited by Canada to France following charges that he participated in several bombings , including one of a Paris subway in 1995 that killed four people and injured 86 .
Canadian authorities were investigating possible ties between Ressam and a group of 11 other men , most of Algerian origin , who had been arrested over the last few months for thefts .
Officials say that the thefts , which consisted of more than 5,000 items , may have been part of a broader scheme to help finance Algerian terrorist activities .
American officials have said that Ressam has a Canadian criminal record for theft of property valued at under $ 5,000 , and that he was being sought on a Canadian arrest warrant .
His arrest as he left Canada last week has prompted American customs officials to tighten security even more than they already had .
Border guards , American embassies , military installations and local police in big cities have also been on heightened alert .
Customs officials in Washington said Sunday that they would add at least 150 more inspectors at remote sites across the Mexican and Canadian borders , including Port Angeles , in response to the arrest of Ressam .
The additional security would come from a combination of redeployed customs inspectors and overtime .
Raymond Kelly , commissioner of the Customs Service , said that because of concerns about terrorist attacks during the year-end holidays , Customs , like other law enforcement agencies , had been placed on a `` heightened state of alert '' even before the latest episode .
The new steps , he said , were an additional tightening of security .
`` It is fair to assume that this person tried to cross at a remote point because of the fairly minimal staffing we have there , '' he said .
Kelly said that travelers would be unlikely to have longer waits when entering the United States , either at remote places or the largest international airports .
Law enforcement agencies around the world have been taking steps to head off possible terrorist acts .
In Pakistan , authorities in Islamabad said they had arrested more than 200 people , mostly Afghan nationals , and tightened security in the largest airports to avert attacks on American citizens , according to The Associated Press .
The arrests were made in Islamabad , the Pakistani capital , and in northwestern Peshawar , which borders Afghanistan .
Last week , officials in Jordan arrested 13 people who Jordanian authorities said were planning attacks there after being trained in Afghanistan .
A spokesman for the Canadian Security Intelligence Service said Sunday that the potential for terrorist-related violence by Muslim extremists has been a top concern of the agency in the 1990s .
That concern has been heightened by the attention surrounding millennium-eve celebrations and Ressam 's arrest .
Islamic extremists may use the millennial celebrations to further their interests with terrorist acts , said Dan Lambert of the CSIS .
