MONTREAL --
A massive cross-border manhunt is under way for possible co-conspirators in a suspected millennium-related terrorist bomb plot against the United States .
At one point over the weekend , police cordoned off an entire block in downtown Montreal and evacuated an apartment building to search for explosives and evidence of conspiracy .
US and Canadian authorities believe that an Algerian charged in Seattle on Friday with smuggling bomb-making materials across the border from British Columbia may be part of a larger conspiracy stretching from Montreal and other Canadian centers to hideaways of Islamic extremists around the world .
The arrest of Ahmed Ressam , 32 , identified as an Algerian national traveling on fake Canadian identity papers and linked to extremists using Montreal as a North American base of operations , has underscored fears that Canada might serve as a springboard for terrorist strikes against the United States .
Antiterrorist experts on both sides of the border warn that Canada 's relatively lax immigration rules have made it an international sanctuary for terrorists .
Last year , for example , a US Justice Department report criticized Canada for granting a convicted terrorist , Gazi Ibrahim Abu Mezer , a student visa in 1993 ; he later slipped into the United States and was arrested for plotting to blow up New York City 's subway system .
The Islamic radical group Hezbollah , the so-called Islamic Army of Osama bin Laden , Sri Lanka 's Tamil Tigers and an array of other organizations from the Middle East , former Soviet republics , Eastern Europe and Asia are thought to use Canada as a place of refuge and source of money raised through crimes .
It is also the easiest point of entry into the United States .
`` It 's like a Club Med for terrorists , '' said Claude Paquette , an investigator with the intelligence service of the Montreal Urban Community Police , which last week led a sweep against suspected Algerian terrorists in Montreal .
`` You plant a bomb somewhere ... and come back here to undertake other types of activities , such as financing . ''
This year , a report by the Canadian Security and Intelligence Service warned , `` there are more international terrorist organizations '' active in Canada `` than any other country . ''
More than a dozen major terrorist organizations have operatives or covert fund-raising agents based in Canada , according to intelligence sources .
In recent years , American officials have complained bitterly that Canada does a poor job of controlling who enters that country .
Many counterterrorist analysts believe Canada 's loose immigration and refugee policies -- especially the slow-working bureaucratic mechanisms for expelling illegal entrants -- represent one of the most dangerous security threats to the United States .
Ressam was arrested Tuesday by US Customs officials near the ferry landing in Port Angeles , Wash. , after a search of his rented Chrysler vehicle uncovered bomb-making materials , including timers , circuit boards , two 22-ounce jars of nitroglycerine , a quantity of sulphate and 110 pounds of urea -- a legal substance used to manufacture fertilizers as well as the sort of powerful homemade explosives used in the Oklahoma City bomb attack in 1994 .
Ressam , who bolted the scene but was grabbed several blocks away , also carried a Canadian passport bearing an alias , and two Quebec province driver 's licenses in different names .
According to Canadian press reports , Ressam was charged twice this year with theft in Quebec and British Columbia , but was quickly released despite his non-citizen status and despite the fact he was already being sought for violation of immigration rules .
The timing devices found in the rental car were rigged to Casio -brand watches , a design that intelligence sources described as typical of the explosives handiwork of the terrorist organization headed by Osama bin Laden , the Saudi national suspected of masterminding the 1998 bomb attacks against US embassies in East Africa .
Ressam was charged in US District Court in Seattle with smuggling explosives as well as with carrying false identification and making false statements to Customs .
He has not formally entered a plea , and defense lawyers Saturday protested an order by a federal judge to destroy the highly volatile nitroglycerine , which had been stored in a bomb disposal truck .
US and Canadian authorities suspect Ressam may be part of a larger terrorist plot , possibly one planning an attack pegged to the new millennium .
But Saturday police in both countries refused to say whether they have any hard evidence pointing to a specific planned target .
Vince Cannistraro , the CIA 's former head of counterintelligence operations , was quoted in wire service reports as saying the electronics allegedly carried by Ressam suggest a connection to bin Laden , whose apprehension the US State Department has posted a $ 5 million reward .
`` The way this bomb was put together , particularly the Casio watch , is a signature of the bin Laden organization , '' Cannistraro said .
A US - Canada investigation into a possible widespread conspiracy rooted among Islamic radicals operating out of Canada is being lead by the FBI and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police .
In a dramatic swoop , bomb specialists with the RCMP sealed off a block in downtown Montreal late Friday and evacuated a building in which Ressam rented an apartment under the alias Benni A. Noris , the name on the passport and one of the driver 's licenses .
No explosives were found in the search .
The RCMP and Montreal Police Saturday refused to say whether the low-rent apartment yielded any other evidence .
Apparently by coincidence , Montreal police last week arrested 11 Algerian nationals on charges of operating a theft and extortion ring to raise money for Islamic terrorists .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Canada itself is almost never a target of terrorist attacks .
But its long and open border with the US -- together with large immigrant communities in such major cities as Montreal , Toronto and Vancouver , which provide easy camouflage and money sources -- have made the country a popular lair for international terrorist groups , according to Canadian law enforcement and intelligence sources .</ENAMEX>
`` The terrorists are not putting bombs on street corners here , '' Paquette said .
`` They are doing other things , like financing their fighting friends overseas . ''
