ATLANTA --
President Clinton 's decision to strike back at terrorists came on the best or worst of weeks depending on whether the public sees it as a cynical move to divert attention from his scandals or rallies behind the president to lift him up and keep him there .
It all depends on whether the public and the politicians find the president is credible enough to be believed when it comes to making life-and-death decisions .
That 's not necessarily a given with a national leader who misled the nation for seven months after looking it in the eye and denying having a relationship with Monica Lewinsky , experts said .
`` The president does have a harder sale than say Jimmy Carter who told the American people ` I would never lie to you , ' '' said Charles Bullock , a political scientist with the University of Georgia .
`` The big problem with this current event is that it 's the script of `` Wag the Dog . ''
History repeats art . ''
In the movie , `` Wag the Dog , '' a president and his advisers divert attention from his sex scandal by staging a phony war .
William Schneider , a political analyst with CNN and the American Enterprise Institute , thought the attack was perfectly timed in terms of Clinton 's political troubles .
The president 's Monday night address about the Lewinsky affair had been vehemently attacked in editorial and political circles and seemed to fuel the train headed to wreck his presidency .
`` The momentum was building to disable his presidency , '' said Schneider , who said he was n't suggesting Clinton attacked for those reasons .
`` This action nipped it in the bud .
He lucked out .
He now gets a second chance . ''
Emory University 's Merle Black said that the attacks would undoubtedly face greater public scrutiny because of the natural suspicion that Clinton was using cruise missiles to boost his public standing and derail Special Prosecutor Ken Starr 's train .
He noted that in misleading the public in the Lewinsky affair , Clinton had undermined his credibility with the public , and it was critical that he restore it if he was to act effectively .
`` He has an opportunity here to reassert leadership and the public approval of his leadership is his strongest asset , '' Black said .
`` His motives will be suspect . ...
I think that is very harmful to a president , especially where lives are at risk .
He needs to have a very convincing rationale about why he felt it necessary to do this . ''
Thomas Schwartz , a historian specializing in foreign policy at Vanderbilt University , said it 's not unusual for the public to suspect ulterior motives in military ventures when presidents are under attack domestically .
He said there were suspicions that President Reagan 's decision to invade Grenada in 1983 was to divert attention from the bombing of the Marine barracks in Lebanon and the failed policy there .
President Nixon faced similar suspicions during the Watergate investigation when he ordered a nuclear alert to thwart plans by the Soviet Union to intervene in the Yom Kippur War in 1973 .
The historian said that Clinton may have felt pressured to act decisively because of fears that America 's enemies might think him so weakened they could challenge US interests abroad .
`` You can always expect accusations , '' he said .
`` In a way its both true and irrelevant .
It 's true that a president under attack will appear weak and is under pressure to do something dramatic abroad .
And it 's important that he appear strong abroad . ''
