HAVANA --
A high-ranking Cuban official has denounced President Clinton 's proposals to ease some restrictions in the United States ' embargo of this communist-run island , calling them a `` deceptive maneuver '' intended to deflect growing opposition around the world to the embargo .
The official , Ricardo Alarcon , the legislative leader who is Fidel Castro 's point man on negotiations with the United States , said the changes were also meant to hide Clinton 's rejection of a bipartisan commission to review the wisdom of the 37-year -old embargo .
Two former Republican secretaries of state are among those who have backed the proposal to set up a commission .
`` The whole world thought at least this commission would be created , '' Alarcon said in a two-hour address on state-run television late Friday night .
His remarks were widely publicized here as Cuba 's official response to Washington 's overtures .
On Tuesday , Clinton announced a package of moves intended to spur private enterprise in Cuba without helping Castro 's government .
They included expanding direct charter flights to the island , allowing more Americans to send cash to Cuba , establishing direct mail service and sanctioning sales of food and agricultural supplies to charities and privately held farms .
While the administration has said the measures represent a significant easing of the sanctions , Cuban officials have characterized them as unimportant tinkering that does nothing to alter the embargo .
The new proposals came on top of a similar raft of minor changes announced in March , when the Clinton administration said for the first time it would allow direct flights to Cuba and legalized cash transfers of up to $ 1,200 a year that Cuban - Americans could send to their relatives on the island .
The administration also said it would allow U.S. companies to sell medicines to Castro 's government on a case-by-case basis .
U.S. officials have said the new policy is aimed at finding ways to help individual Cubans and charities , and to encourage private enterprise , without letting up pressure on Castro 's government .
In his rambling address , Alarcon presented a detailed chronology of the events since March , arguing that Washington had failed to live up to its promises to allow sales of medicine .
He also pointed out that the direct flights to Cuba and legalized remittances had in practice changed nothing at all .
Cuban - Americans had been sending money home through illegal channels in any case and were always able to travel to Cuba through other countries .
Alarcon also suggested that the new proposal to let Americans other than relatives send money to Cubans had a sinister purpose .
Noting that Cuban - Americans in Miami had financed terrorist groups that have , among other things , bombed hotels in Havana , Alarcon suggested the new rules would let right-wing extremists in Miami funnel more money to would-be counterrevolutionaries so that they could `` look for ways to manufacture traitors . ''
`` This is not the natural and normal help given within a family , but has an end clearly subversive and counterrevolutionary , '' he said .
Alarcon added that Cuban - Americans were the only immigrants in the United States who were not allowed to send whatever amount of money they liked to their relatives .
He called the policy discriminatory and repressive .
He also played down the importance of Washington 's proposal to let charter flights leave the United States from cities other than Miami , saying that Clinton had said as much in March but that the changes had never been carried out .
Much of Alarcon 's speech was devoted to listing a number of liberal legislators and advocacy groups in the United States that have protested against the embargo in recent months .
He also highlighted the fact that the U.N. General Assembly has voted overwhelmingly for seven years to ask the United States to drop the policy .
On the question of direct mail between the two countries , Alarcon said there was a risk that militant anti- Castro factions in the United States would try to use the service to send letter bombs .
`` One of the fundamental questions I would ask the U.S. , '' he said , `` is : What are you going to do with your terrorists ?
How are you going to guarantee nobody here is going to suffer ? ''
Winding up his talk , Alarcon urged Cubans to confront this `` new attempt of aggression , this new attempt to attack us . ''
`` It is an attack on an ideological plane , a political plane , without giving in reality anything , trying to confuse and trick you , '' he said .
`` I 'm sure all of our people sincerely are going to reject this new face of the war against Cuba .
They are going to continue forward with the same patriotic spirit . ''
Then he predicted the White House would eventually succumb to pressure from liberal groups within the United States and from other countries on the question of the embargo .
`` Despite this deceptive maneuver , they know that this blockade , this criminal policy , they are going to have to abandon it , they are going to have to change it , '' he said .
`` Someday they will have to abandon it , because they wo n't be able to sustain it in front of the growing opposition of the world . ''
