WASHINGTON --
American and Western officials describe the Clinton administration 's decision to use missile strikes to respond to the embassy bombings in East Africa as a significant departure from its past practice of seeking international support and U.N. authorization for American military action .
In the past , citing `` aggressive multilateralism , '' the Clinton administration has waited for law enforcement authorities to come to a conclusion or has sought the broadest possible international support for its actions .
It has preferred to use sanctions or to secure a U.N. Security Council resolution authorizing the use of force after presenting the evidence .
But with the long stalemate in the Middle East , the lack of Saudi cooperation with the 1996 bombing of American troops at Khobar Towers and the shift in Iraqi policy due to irresolution from the Security Council , Clinton was less inclined to wait and allow America `` to again appear weak or irresolute , '' a senior American official said .
`` This is a departure , '' a senior State Department official said .
`` This is the beginning of a serious effort to go after terrorists who threaten Americans . ''
Several senior officials , all of whom spoke on the condition of anonymity , defended the rapid use of military force against the terrorism network of Osama bin Laden , citing several factors : the ambivalence of Muslim allies , the United Nations ' delay in dealing with Iraq , and mounting evidence of plans for impending attacks on more American embassies .
Another official emphasized the importance of imminent threat rather than retaliation .
`` We 're not in the tit-for-tat business , '' the official said .
`` We 're in the deterrence business . ''
Deterrence , he suggested , is not built on overly legalistic niceties or delay .
A senior White House official said : `` The threat was credible and imminent to American citizens .
It was directed to us , not to the U.N. To take other measures would have risked human lives . ''
American credibility in the Arab world had already suffered because of Washington 's failure to secure an interim settlement in the Middle East peace negotiations .
Arab countries are reluctant to provide public support for American military operations like Thursday 's , even when aimed at bin Laden , who is working to undermine the established Arab regimes .
Senior Arab diplomats said that Arab ambassadors complained Friday to the assistant secretary of state for Near East affairs , Martin Indyk , that striking Sudan -- a member of the Arab League -- was a strategic error , and noted that even Egypt had chosen to keep public silence about the strikes .
But they did not make a point of defending bin Laden in private , though their countries refused to support the missile strikes in public , and the state-controlled newspapers in moderate Persian Gulf allies like Qatar and Abu Dhabi sharply attacked the American strikes as arrogant .
Hala Maksoud , president of the American - Arab Anti - Discrimination Committee here , said the strikes `` reinforce the impression that the U.S. is trigger-happy when it comes to the Arab world . ''
While Sudan and the Taliban -- the militant Islamic group that controls most of Afghanistan -- are isolated among other Muslims , she said , `` because of the Israeli stalemate and frustration , the Arab world ends up sympathizing with Sudan and Taliban .
`` The impression is that the United States pre-empted the results of its investigation , did not give Afghanistan a chance to hand over bin Laden , did not go to the Security Council or show evidence or rally world opinion or consult its allies , but just is going it alone and undermining the international community and its will . ''
Ironically , senior American officials say , there are indications of significant progress in the last few days to conclude the agreement between Israel and the Palestinians over a 13 percent withdrawal of Israeli troops from the West Bank .
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is said to have agreed to the 13 percent the Americans have insisted upon , although 3 percent of it is to involve a form of a now largely unpopulated `` nature preserve , '' with restrictions over Palestinian rights to build there .
`` The differences are narrowing and there are hopes that they can be bridged , '' one official said , noting that American negotiator Dennis Ross would go to Oslo this weekend for an event at which senior Israeli and Palestinian negotiators will be present .
`` But by the time we have a deal , '' the official said , `` it wo n't mean very much , and the bounce will be zippo , and even bitter . ''
Kenneth Katzman , senior Middle East analyst at the Congressional Research Service , said that Arab countries saw a parallel between Saddam Hussein and bin Laden : `` The American willingness to strike wantonly and cause collateral damage without taking the matter to the Security Council , presenting evidence , and getting authorization to strike . ''
The Americans thought they would have more support given bin Laden 's threat to Arab regimes , Katzman said .
`` But the Arab street matters , and moderate Arab governments are afraid of inflaming bin Laden supporters in their countries , and the numbers of those supporters have increased .
Egypt and the Saudis are nervous in part because they do n't want bin Laden to be made into a martyr , and drive more young people into Islamic Jihad . ''
More young Arabs , Katzman said , sympathize with bin Laden 's desire `` to force the infidels out of the Muslim world , '' with Israel and the United States being the main interlopers , now that the Afghans have evicted the Soviet Union .
Robert Kagan of the Carnegie Endowment applauded the missile strikes .
`` It is a departure for this administration , and it points up their manifest failure to rally allies behind the American use of force , especially when it comes to the Security Council , '' he said .
`` Now , if you wound bin Laden , you 've got to kill him , '' Kagan added .
`` We need to keep going after him and put him out of business .
But that 's a real campaign , and it may entail more serious foreign-policy challenges than bombing two primitive non-states like Afghanistan and Sudan . ''
