WASHINGTON --
With zero-hour fast approaching for the turn of the millennium , federal agents across the country are conducting interviews with people who may have information about possible terrorist attacks , the FBI said Thursday .
While the questioning proceeded , authorities in New York Thursday charged a man with aiding Ahmed Ressam , who was arrested earlier this month on explosives charges as he entered Washington state from Canada .
Abdel Ghani was charged with concealing his material support of Ressam and conspiracy to traffic in , and use , fraudulent bank and credit cards .
The US attorney 's office in New York said the arrest was `` part of efforts to pursue all information regarding the risk of any planned attacks but has not suggested any specific and credible threats against any particular targets , either in New York or elsewhere . ''
Information stemming from the Ressam investigation also led to the arrest of five Algerian nationals in the Boston area Thursday .
However , the charges were related to immigration issues and not terrorism .
The questioning of `` fewer than 100 '' individuals nationwide is part of the ongoing investigation of Ressam , who was arrested Dec. 14 as he crossed into the United Sates with explosives material , said FBI spokesman Jim Davis .
The interviews may go beyond the Ressam case to involve other potential bombings or attacks , he said .
But Davis cautioned that the questioning `` is not a sweep , '' and added that `` the fact that we 're interviewing these people does n't mean they 're suspects . ''
The interviews were conducted Thursday in Massachusetts , New York , Washington state , Texas , and California , Justice Department spokesman Myron Marlin confirmed .
The questioning `` sends a little bit of a message that the FBI is watching here , '' Marlin said .
Fear of a possible New Year 's terrorist attack has lent a grave undercurrent to what is meant to be a festive occasion , although law enforcement agencies insist they have no credible evidence of any specific threat .
Still , concerns of a terrorist assault have been fueled by the arrests of Ressam and two others later detained at the Vermont border .
Authorities say both Ressam and one of the individuals arrested Dec. 19 at the Vermont border , Lucia Garofalo , have links to an Algerian extremist group .
But Muslim Americans bristled at the questionings , complaining that the FBI is singling out Muslim , Algerian - Americans .
Ressam and another man , Bouabide Chamchi , who was arrested with Garofalo , are both Algerian nationals .
`` Muslims have been made the bogeyman of the day , '' said Ibrahim Hooper of the Council on American - Islamic Relations , based in Washington .
He said he had received `` scattered reports '' of Muslim Americans complaining they were intimidated by overzealous FBI agents .
`` We just hope this thing will blow over , '' Hooper said .
Federal authorities allege that Ressam and Garofalo are connected to the Armed Islamic Group , known by its French acronym , GIA. The GIA , considered a terrorist group by the State Department , is the major Islamic extremist group involved in Algeria 's nearly eight-year civil war .
The group has not , however , claimed responsibility for any attacks in the United States , State Department and academic experts note .
The GIA 's wrath is generally aimed at pro-secular government forces in Algeria , and at France , which the GIA perceives as being sympathetic to thian government .
With large , New Year 's Eve celebrations planned across the nation , law enforcement officials are n't taking any chances on security .
FBI Director Louis Freeh met Thursday in Washington with Canadian law enforcement officials to `` ensure continuing close coordination on law enforcement and intelligence issues , '' said an FBI statement .
A Justice Department official played down the meeting as any kind of master planning session to fight terrorists .
`` If it was something big , they would n't tell you about it , '' the official said .
In New York , police sealed manholes , and removed mailboxes and newspaper dispensers near Times Square to frustrate would-be terrorists .
Such precautionary measures , however , are taken every New Year 's Eve , said New York Police Department spokesman officer Chris Cottingham .
For this year , the city is putting 8,000 police on the streets to patrol the droppping of the ball at midnight -- an event expected to draw millions of revelers .
Four people were arrested in Brooklyn Thursday by a joint antiterrorism task force of the New York police and the FBI .
Both the complaint and the charges against the four were sealed by a federal judge in Manhattan , and New York Police Commissioner Howard Safir would not discuss details of the case .
The streets of Washington were quiet Thursday , as police readied the area around the National Mall for the concert , film and light show planned for the capital celebration .
President Clinton and First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton are planning to participate in the outdoor event as scheduled , regardless of fears over terrorism .
`` We never discuss the particulars of security , '' said White House spokesman Jake Siewert .
`` Obviously , law enforcement has taken the measures necessary '' to protect the Clintons and the rest of the New Year 's Eve celebrants , he said .
In remarks prepared for Friday , the president hits strongly on a favorite theme , unity and racial harmony .
Citing the legacy of Abraham Lincoln , Clinton says , `` Let us pledge that each year will be closer to this , our founding principle .
Let us pledge that the new millennium will bring , in the words of the great emancipator , a new birth of freedom . ''
Clinton is to open ceremonies on the Mall this morning , speak to children and to diplomats in the afternoon , and then host millennial ceremonies late in the evening and into New Year 's Day .
