WASHINGTON --
Security is being tightened at the nation 's airports after an Algerian man was charged last week with smuggling bombmaking materials across the border from British Columbia , fanning fresh fears about domestic terrorism as Americans prepare for millennium celebrations .
The Federal Aviation Administration is sending in extra teams trained to detect even the smallest amount of explosives and additional FAA inspectors to help monitor security operations at airports .
The agency also said it will have on hand more bomb-sniffing dogs and more uniformed police patrolling airports , both inside and outside .
Meanwhile , beefed up patrols at the 301 points of entry into the United States , including in Maine and Vermont , have already yielded two arrests .
Bouabide Chamchi , 20 , an Algerian with refugee status living in Montreal , and Lucia Garofalo , 35 , a Canadian woman , were arrraigned Tuesday in Burlington , Vt. on various immigration charges after being arrested Sunday night by US Border Patrol officers in Beechers Falls , in Vermont 's northeast corner .
Holiday travelers are being urged to arrive at the airport at least one hour before domestic flights and two hours before international flights , and to be prepared for strict enforcement of parking rules .
They can also avoid inconvenience by not gift wrapping packages , the agency said , because they may have to be opened if something suspicious is seen by x-ray machines .
The moves by the FAA and the Border Patrol are the latest in a series of steps taken by the federal government to respond to what officials have described as a `` heighted security risk '' against Americans coinciding with the new year and following the arrest in Washington state last week of Ahmed Ressam .
Ressam , 32 , who authorities have identified as an Algerian national traveling on fake Canadian identity papers and linked to extremists using Montreal as a North American base of operations , was charged Friday in Seattle with carrying more than 100 pounds of bombing-making supplies and a sophisticated detonating device across the border in a rental car .
Federal investigators are looking into whether Ressam was affiliated with any terrorist group , including the Islamic group linked to exiled Osama bin Laden , the millionaire Saudi militant based in Afghanistan for whose apprehension the US State Department has posted a $ 5 million reward .
Ressam 's arrest has sparked concern about domestic terrorism and apparently precipitated a two-hour meeting Monday at the White House that included some of President Clinton 's top advisers on law enforcement and foreign policy -- Secretary of State Madeleine Albright , Attorney General Janet Reno , CIA Director George Tenet , and General Henry H. Shelton , chairman of the joint chiefs of staff .
White House Press Secretary Joseph Lockhart said Clinton did not attend the meeting , and he tried to play down its importance , describing the meeting as a routine gathering of officials who normally discuss terrorism issues .
But , he said , `` I think we have made the case in the past that the US is not invulnerable to domestic terrorism , but there 's not specific information now about particular targets here . ''
He added , `` I do n't think there is a scare mode . ''
He and other government officials continued to stress Tuesday that they were unaware of any other specific threats against US targets , other than the Seattle incident .
However , they said the State Department 's travel advisory , warning caution for Americans traveling abroad for the holidays , still stands .
Pentagon spokesman Kenneth H. Bacon said the Defense Department has sent two advisories to military installations and commanders around the world to help them make their own threat assessments and to devise plans to protect American forces .
Asked whether the Pentagon had taken any extra precautions or put any additional military assets on standby , Bacon responded , `` Just let me say that we are taking apppropriate action . ''
The State Department 's deputy spokesman , James B. Foley , said the U.S. Embassy in Quito , Ecuador , was closed Friday over concern it might be targeted by terrorists .
A senior State Department official said the agency plans to update the overseas travel advisory it issued 11 days ago , urging Americans traveling internationally to take extra care and avoid large crowds .
The official said that update , which will come late by Thursday at the latest , will include more details about the plans of 13 members of a terrorist group linked to bin Laden that Jordanian authorities arrested last week , saying they were planning attacks against Americans and Israelis , among others .
The FAA , which issued its advisory in a statement , said the increased security is not expected to cause airport delays , but will be noticeable to passengers .
FAA spokesman Paul Takemoto declined to discuss whether security will be tightened at all major airports , saying , `` That could compromise the very procedures themselves . ''
