MONTREAL --
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Canada is vehemently protesting a US plan to tighten security along the border , even as the Canadian intelligence service Thursday acknowledged that another suspected terrorist had been under surveillance in Montreal but managed to flee the country .</ENAMEX>
Canada 's ambassador to Washington , Raymond Chretien , said Ottawa will vigorously battle any attempts by the US to beef up security along the 5,525-mile border , as Congress and the White House are proposing .
`` I will fight this measure until the threat is removed of additional controls at our border , '' Chretien told journalists .
Canada is supported by at least one New England governor , Vermont 's Howard Dean , who sees a danger to the regional economy in the proposed crackdown at busy northern border crossings .
Dean this week dismissed Congressional charges that Canada has become a haven for terrorists as `` political blather . ''
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">But deepening US fears that lax Canadian immigration rules have turned the northern neighbor into a safe operating base for international terrorists was reinforced as the Canadian Security Intelligence Service confirmed reports that an Islamic radical suspected of plotting bomb attacks against the US was able to slip surveillance in Montreal and leave the country .</ENAMEX>
Mohambedou Ould Slahi , who arrived in Canada last fall and was involved with Algerians in Montreal accused in an alleged terrorist conspiracy against the US , has been arrested in the African nation of Senegal , according to the New York Times .
The newspaper identified Slahi as the brother-in-law of one of the top lieutenants of terrorist financier Osama bin Laden .
Bin Laden , whom the US has formally charged with masterminding deadly bomb attacks against US embassies in East Africa , is also suspected of complicity in a alleged attempt to smuggle terrorist operatives and bomb materials into the US from Canada .
That plot was thwarted in a string of arrests in the US and Canada beginning Dec. 14 when Ahmed Ressam , an Algerian whose last fixed address had been Montreal , was apprehended crossing into Washington state driving a car with enough bomb materials to flatten a building .
An Algerian and Canadian woman were arrested in Vermont a few days later .
And two more Algerians are in jail in New York and Montreal on charges stemming from the same alleged conspiracy .
All of the suspects , including the man detained in Senegal , seem to have connected in Montreal , according to Canadian investigators .
Moreover , although several of the suspects were in Canada illegally and had repeated brushes with the law , authorities made no serious effort to have them arrested or deported .
Indeed , most were on welfare and took advantage of other generous Canadian social programs .
Ressam , at one point , had been under surveillance by Canadian authorities because of suspected terrorist ties , but the watch was withdrawn because of security service budget constraints .
Slahi , believed to be a national of Mauritania , `` worked closely '' in Montreal with Mokthar Haouri , an Algerian now in Canadian custody under an extradition request from the US .
Haouri provided the bomb material to Ressam , according to Canadian and US officials .
US investigators flew to Senegal Thursday to question Slahi .
Meanwhile , the latest arrest is sure to stoke outrage against Canada in US Congress , where hearings are underway on whether to speed implementation of a 1996 law requiring heavy new controls on the US - Canada border .
The law has been delayed because of lobbying by New England politicians and the Canadian government , but some congressional leaders are running out of patience .
Texas Republican Lamar Smith , chairman of the House Immigration Subcommittee , this week blasted the northern neighbor as `` a Club Med for terrorists , '' repeating a phrase used by a Canadian intelligence investigator in an interview with the Boston Globe .
`` We clearly need to have better security on the northern border , '' Smith said .
`` We need to reduce the threat of terrorism , drug smuggling and alien smuggling . ''
But any serious crackdown at the roughly 170 official ports of entry between the two countries could have dramatic economic consequences for thousands of businesses on both sides .
Canada is far and away the largest trading partner of the US , with nearly $ 1 billion in two-way commerce crossing the border every day along with hundreds of thousands of motor vehicles and airline passengers .
Traditionally , security at US - Canada border crossings has been loose , with most individuals who make the crossing not even required to show any identification .
Although volumes of trade and traffic are much higher than with Mexico , the US keeps only about 1200 Customs agents and 300 Border Patrol agents along the northern border .
On the much shorter southern border , by contrast , the US keeps 2000 Customs agents and 7200 Border Patrol agents .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">`` Terrorists ... are increasingly using Canada as a transit countrt enroute to the US , '' Smith said .
Some Canadian analysts agree .</ENAMEX>
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">`` Some of our laws are terrorist friendly , '' acknowledged David Harris , former chief of Strategic Planning for the Canadian Security Intelligence Service , referring to Canada 's policy of granting more or less automatic admission to anyone claiming to be a `` refugee '' together with a cumbersome bureaucracy that allows even illegal aliens under deportation orders to remain free during an appeals process that can stretch over years and even decades .</ENAMEX>
But Ambassador Chretien defended the Canadian system .
`` Our laws are as strict , if not more strict , than American laws , '' he told Canadian journalists in Washington .
