WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Americans and Cubans traded high-fives and handshakes on baseball diamonds in Baltimore and Havana .
But in the diplomatic arena , it 's hardball of another sort .
The friendly sports competition was on display when the Orioles played a Cuban all-star team Monday night , and five weeks ago when the two squared off in Cuba , with Baltimore winning 3-2 in 11 innings .
It was a case of `` Baseball Si , Politics No . ''
That 's in marked contrast to the four-decade -old U.S. - Cuba government feud .
A case in point is the recently concluded spring session of the 53-member U.N. Human Rights Commission in Geneva .
Normally , the United States and Cuba engage in long-distance verbal volleying .
In Geneva , however , it was a close-quarter diplomatic battle over a U.S. -backed resolution criticizing Cuba 's human rights policy .
The resolution expressed concern at the `` continued violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Cuba , such as freedom of expression , association and assembly and rights associated with the administration of justice . ''
On the surface , it seemed an unequal struggle , involving the world 's richest and most powerful country and a small poor neighbor that sticks by an old-style communist system widely discredited elsewhere .
The commission takes up an anti- Cuba resolution each year , usually introduced by the United States .
This year , Cuba was tossed a diplomatic curve ball when two former communist allies of Cuba -- the Czech Republic and Poland -- introduced it .
A wrathful Cuban delegation derided the Czechs and Poles , saying they were `` doing the dirty work of the United States . ''
Carlos Lage , one of President Fidel Castro 's most trusted lieutenants , set the tone , insisting it was unseemly for the United States to pass judgment on Cuba 's human rights situation .
Lage contended nearly 1 million Americans are homeless , 43 million have no health insurance and 20 percent are functional illiterates .
In contrast , he asked : `` Where , in Cuba , are the illiterates , the children without schools and the teachers without classrooms ?
Where is there a single citizen without health care coverage ? ''
He derided U.S. policies toward Cuba , including an economic embargo , as `` criminal , failed and ridiculous . ''
Indeed , the embargo , which was eased earlier this year to allow more regulated sales of food and pesticides , elicits a measure of sympathy for Cuba internationally .
Many countries sense that American hostility toward the island has contributed to the rigidity of Cuba 's internal policies .
It is one reason some countries close ranks behind Cuba each year on the anti- Cuba resolution .
In 1998 , it was defeated 19-16 , with 18 abstentions .
This year , Secretary of State Madeleine Albright left nothing to chance .
She telephoned at least five Latin American foreign ministers seeking support for the resolution .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">The day of the vote , her top aides lobbied into the early hours .
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez , an avowed admirer of Castro , also worked the phones , urging his Latin American colleagues to vote `` no . ''</ENAMEX>
In response , the State Department 's top aide for economic affairs , Alan Larson , abruptly canceled long-planned economic consultations in Caracas .
Castro himself was busy lobbying .
He requested a week 's postponement in the Geneva vote so he could do some arm twisting at a Caribbean regional summit in the Dominican Republic in mid- April .
Perhaps the most controversial bid for support occurred when El Salvador agreed to abstain from the vote after Cuba promised to commute the death sentences of two Salvadorans convicted in 1997 hotel bombings in Cuba .
One problem for Cuba , however , was the conviction of four dissidents who were sentenced in March to prison terms of 3 1/2 to 5 years .
Cuba said the four were guilty of `` incitement to sedition . ''
Also , Cuba had a new law imposing sentences of up to 20 years on Cubans found to be cooperating with U.S. attempts to promote a transition to democracy in Cuba .
Cuba 's critics saw the law as punishment for independent thinkers .
Cuba says it is merely an attempt to punish those who collaborate with the enemy .
After four weeks of jockeying , the resolution passed April 23 on a vote of 21-20 , with 12 abstentions .
When the tally was announced , one Cuban delegate wept .
For Cuba , some of the sting from that vote may have been eased by the outcome Monday night in Baltimore : Cuba 12 , Orioles 6 .
