CARACAS , Venezuela
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Venezuelans endorsed President Hugo Chavez 's `` social revolution '' on Sunday by electing him to a fresh six-year term , consolidating Latin America 's second leftist regime after Cuba .
With 77 percent of the votes counted , 59 percent went to Chavez and 37 percent went to his nearest challenger , former Zulia state Gov. Francisco Arias Cardenas .
Celebrations broke out in the capital of Caracas , with fireworks and revelers in the streets after the National Electoral Council announced the results .
Shouting , `` Chavez !
Chavez ! '' , thousands of people , many of them wearing the president 's trademark red paratrooper 's beret , rejoiced inside the gates of the presidential palace in the capital , Caracas .
`` Every day I feel more proud and more committed to you , my brothers and my sisters , '' the president told the crowd from a balcony draped with the Venezuelan flag , frequently breaking into song .
`` We will demonstrate to you that we are here out of love for our people . ''
The voting was to determine the presidency , a new 165-member unicameral legislature , governors , mayors and other offices -- all institutions that had to be `` re-legitimized '' under a new constitution Chavez pushed through after taking office last year .
Chavez , who has completely overhauled Venezuela 's institutions during his short term , had asked voters to look past sharp rises in crime and unemployment by re-electing him and giving his reform movement a majority in Congress .
`<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">` Hugo , I am sure that nothing and no one can stop you now , '' Cuban President Fidel Castro told his friend Chavez in a chummy telephone conversation Saturday .</ENAMEX>
Still , even with Chavez 's overwhelming victory , he could emerge from the voting with a weaker mandate .
The partial results showed opposition candidates winning 10 of Venezuela 's 23 governorships .
No results were immediately available on the congressional races .
While the president 's movement was expected to win at least a simple majority in the legislature , Chavez may fall short of the two-thirds needed to rubber-stamp presidential appointments and proposed laws .
Most Venezuelans seemed to believe Chavez 's promises that he will now refocus his revolution from erasing the old political order to what matters most to the people : jobs and personal safety .
`` These problems ca n't be fixed in one day or one year , '' said Milagros Iguerara , a 50-year -old housewife standing in line to vote .
`` He is going to need five years or eight years . ''
Chavez 's support among the poor majority of Venezuela 's 23 million people had made him the favorite over Arias , who helped Chavez lead a failed 1992 coup attempt but who broke away from the president this year .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">The country 's poor overwhelmingly put their faith in Chavez 's `` social revolution , '' while the bulk of the middle and upper classes , frightened by Chavez 's attacks on business and his coziness with Cuba , supported Arias .</ENAMEX>
The success of Chavez , 46 , is a testament to previous governments ' failure to provide a decent standard of living in the world 's third-largest oil-exporting country -- and a reminder that not everyone accepts globalization and free markets as a model for society .
Thousands of people waited in lines for hours in Sunday 's hot tropical sun to cast ballots filled with dozens of candidates and parties .
The national election board ordered polling stations to stay open an extra two hours to accommodate the crowds and to compensate for technical glitches that delayed voting in some areas .
About 12 million Venezuelans were eligible to vote .
The balloting was originally set for May 28 , but was postponed because of computer difficulties in the vote-tallying system .
In a speech at a Caracas hotel late Sunday , Arias refused to concede defeat , saying his campaign had collected election results that differ from the official tally .
He said he would provide more details on Monday .
The candidate vowed to `` maintain the civic struggle , '' adding : `` This country wants and seeks to live in freedom .
It wants and seeks democracy . ''
During the campaign , Arias had said he wanted to reverse what he calls Chavez 's militarization of Venezuelan society and take a friendlier stance with business leaders to attract foreign investment .
`` The country is not going to advance with populism , but rather with technology , '' said Carlos Piniero , a 40-year -old businessman who supports Arias .
Chavez , through his fiery speeches attacking a `` rancid oligarchy , '' has rekindled hope among Venezuelans who have seen their standard of living steadily decline over the last two decades .
For the first time in memory , the Venezuelan economy has fallen into recession during an oil boom : The gross domestic product shrank by 7 percent last year despite a quadrupling of petroleum prices .
And the almost religious support Chavez enjoyed a year ago has begun to evaporate , with polls showing his approval rating falling from more than 80 percent when he took office to about 60 percent now .
In his speech Sunday , Chavez told the business community to `` fear no more '' and urged them to help `` save the Venezuelan economy . ''
