CARACAS , Venezuela
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- President Hugo Chavez on Sunday praised his Andean counterparts for asserting their independence from the United States by resisting U.S. pressure to condemn President Alberto Fujimori 's recent victory in the polls .
Chavez , a left-leaning nationalist who led a botched coup attempt in 1992 and was elected president in December 1998 , stressed that the United States has no business getting involved in Peru 's internal affairs .
`` If we had left Peru alone in the face of pressure by the United States , it -LRB- Peru -RRB- would be on its knees right now , '' Chavez said upon arriving in Venezuela after attending a two-day summit in Lima , Peru .
`` The dominance of the imperalists must be left behind , '' Chavez said .
The U.S. government harshly criticized Fujimori 's re-election in a May 28 vote which was boycotted by his main rival , Alejandro Toledo , who claimed the poll was rigged .
The United States called on the Organization of American States , or OAS , to apply economic and political sanctions in an effort to isolate the Andean country .
However , the OAS stopped short of questioning Fujimori 's victory or imposing sanctions .
Instead it resolved to send a high-level mission to Peru to work on strengthening democratic institutions .
Amid this backdrop , the presidents of Bolivia , Colombia , Ecuador , Peru , and Venezuela signed a document Saturday establishing `` the principle of nonintervention '' in these Andean nations .
Chavez , who was sworn in as president of the Andean Community during the summit , said that cooperation between Andean nations is necessary to curb the dominance of the United States in international affairs .
He also stressed that opposing a `` unipolar '' world dominated by a single superpower will benefit the Andean nations in general , not only Venezuela .
Political analysts in Venezuela believe that the pact could strengthen Chavez ' diplomatic muscle in the troubled region .
Fausto Maso , a highly respected political analyst and columnist for daily El Nacional newspaper , said that the pact will `` lessen the cost '' of diplomatic conflicts with the United States , because Venezuela will be able to count on support from its neighbors .
However , Maso said it is unlikely that the pact will hamper U.S. - Venezuelan relations or foreign investment in this oil-rich but poverty-stricken nation of 23 million , `` This -LRB- pact -RRB- constitutes low intensity anti-imperialism , it is not like Fidel Castro in 1958 .
The Americans should not be losing sleep over this , '' Maso said .
In Washington , a spokesman said the U.S. State Department had no comment on Chavez ' statements .
Representatives of the Andean Community are slated to meet July 24 in Caracas on July 24 continue discussions on economic and political integration in the region .
