VALENCIA , Venezuela --
He had n't slept for two days .
His military uprising was unraveling .
And he was headed for two years in the stockade .
Yet when army Lt. Col. Hugo Chavez faced the TV cameras on Feb. 4 , 1992 , to capitulate , he became a kind of Venezuelan folk hero .
Clad in a red beret and camouflage fatigues , the charismatic Chavez came across like a tropical Douglas MacArthur .
He solemnly took responsibility for his revolt against the scandal-ridden Venezuelan government and announced that he , too , would return .
`` He was a tough guy who said , `` We failed , I 'm sorry , and we will try again to throw the rascals out , ' '' said Herbert Koeneke , an economist who was one of Chavez 's university professors .
`` This was in contrast to most politicians who are very reluctant to say , `` I 'm to blame . '
'' `` People said he was courageous , '' added Rolando Diaz , a researcher at the Latin American Institute of Social Investigation in Caracas .
`` The popular image is of those three minutes he had on TV when he gave up . ''
As Chavez predicted , he is back .
Cashiered from the army , he is trying to take power through the ballot box in the Dec. 6 presidential election and is the front-runner in the polls .
`` All of this is the fruit of that event six years ago , '' Chavez said , as he settled into a twin-engine charter plane with his wife and infant daughter following a boisterous campaign rally in the industrial city of Valencia .
`` Thanks to the consequences of Feb. 4 , I am going to be president . ''
Other candidates may have better family names and wield resumes notched with triumphs in business , law , education and politics .
But Chavez , 44 , has more in common with average Venezuelans .
He was born into a working-class family in the farming town of Sabaneta , about 250 miles southwest of the capital city of Caracas .
A southpaw , he dreamed of being a baseball pitcher .
Instead , he joined the army , because it was one of the few ways for a man of his means to move up in the world .
Chavez won quick promotions and became known for his integrity and leadership .
Growing increasingly restless with Venezuela 's economic decay , he formed a clandestine group of military officers known as the Bolivarian Revolutionary Movement -200 , which evoked the memory of 19th century South American liberator Simon Bolivar .
In 1988 , the group was involved in a failed plot to kidnap Venezuela 's acting president , and Chavez was exiled to a far-away posting on the Colombian border , according to Koeneke .
Later , Chavez assumed command of a paratrooper battalion in the city of Maracay , from where he launched his 1992 coup attempt .
The rebellion followed three years of growing civil unrest under then- President Carlos Andres Perez .
Crime was rising , and striking workers were shutting down parts of the government .
Some 300 Venezuelans were killed in rioting to protest food shortages and Perez 's free-market economic reforms .
`` I felt like I had been unchained , '' said Chavez , reminiscing about the early hours of the rebellion as he chewed on a clove of ginger to soothe a throat irritated from stump speeches .
`` I felt liberated .
`` The military rebellion was going to occur .
No one could stop it , '' he said , `` because there was a state of anguish inside the armed forces .
What happened had to happen . ''
Perez , who is now under house arrest in his Caracas bungalow on charges of misappropriating public funds , said in an interview that he had never heard of Chavez when the uprising began .
`` He was unknown , '' recalled Perez , who was tipped off by military intelligence about the impending rebellion and narrowly escaped an attack on the national palace in Caracas .
`` They tried to take advantage of the great changes that my government was trying to put into place to destroy the democracy . ''
While tanks and armored vehicles surrounded the national palace , Chavez and his backers gained partial control of four major cities .
But after about 18 hours , the rebellion collapsed .
The air force , which had pledged neutrality , turned against Chavez .
Rebel communications were jammed , and Chavez 's troops failed to seize TV stations , leaving much of the population unaware of the uprising and its aims .
`` There was a passive reaction from the population , because they did n't know what was going on , '' said Chavez , who insists that 80 percent of Venezuelans supported his uprising .
`` So I decided to put down my arms and call for a surrender .
It was n't really a defeat for us .
It was a moral victory . ''
In what became known as the `` For Now '' speech , Chavez accepted responsibility for the deaths of 18 soldiers killed in the rebellion and implied that he would return to lead future battles .
`` Comrades , unfortunately , for now , the objectives we set were not achieved in the capital .
We did not manage to seize power .
You did a fine job there , but it is time to prevent more bloodshed , '' Chavez said in his address .
After serving two years and two months in jail , Chavez was pardoned by President Rafael Caldera and went on to form a political party , the Fifth Republic Movement .
Chavez is n't the only plotter who parlayed the coup attempt into a political career .
One participant , Lt. Col. Francisco Arias Cardenas , was elected governor of Zulia state , and another is running for a governor 's post in Nov. 8 regional elections .
Even Chavez 's father is trying to capitalize on his son 's fame by running for governor of Barinas state .
Still , back in 1992 , Koeneke says , people preferred overhauling the democratic system rather than scrapping it .
He cited a poll conducted a month after the uprising showing that just 26 percent of Venezuelans favored a military government .
The outpouring of affection for Chavez `` was a reaction against corruption and mismanagement , '' Koeneke said .
`` But people were not really supporting the coup d 'etat . ''
Today , many analysts claim that Chavez , who goes by the nickname `` El Comandante , '' may have a hard time adapting to democratic rules after so many years of giving orders .
For Chavez , that view reflects an ignorance of what makes a military leader .
`` You may believe that a man gives an order and the rest have to follow it like a machine .
But it 's not like that , '' Chavez said .
`` For those who think it 's easy , I invite them to join the army and learn whether or not it 's easy to command 500 armed men and to maintain high morale and have them obey you -- not because you are a lieutenant colonel , but because you are a true leader . ''
Even so , several of Chavez 's role models come from the authoritarian mold .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">He received a hero 's welcome when he visited Cuba in 1994 .
He has praised Cuban leader Fidel Castro , former Panamanian strongman Omar Torrijos and Marcos Perez Jimenez , the last of Venezuela 's military rulers who was ousted in 1958 .</ENAMEX>
`` The man wants to be a dictator .
There 's no other way around it , '' said a Caracas business leader who did not want to be quoted by name .
Washington seems to agree .
While officially neutral on the Venezuelan election , the U.S. State Department has twice turned down Chavez 's request for a visa , citing his participation in the coup attempt .
Chavez replies that 1992 was no ordinary time in Venezuela , that his rebellion was no ordinary coup attempt .
`` The truth is that what has destroyed people 's confidence in Venezuela has been the corrupt and backward governments of the last 40 years , '' he said .
`` I 'm no putschist .
We did n't make any assault on democracy , because there was no democracy . ''
XXXXEND OF STORY
