Six years ago , Hugo Chavez languished in a Venezuela prison , accused of leading a bloody , failed coup that killed hundreds of people .
Sunday , as millions of Venezuelans vote , the former paratrooper -- who has been denied a visa to visit the United States -- is poised to become the country 's next president .
With adoring references to Simon Bolivar , the 19th century revolutionary leader who liberated Venezuela and other South American countries from the Spanish monarchy , Chavez stirs crowds with vague promises of a modern-day `` social revolution that ca n't be stopped '' -- and that 's what scares business leaders and investors at home and abroad .
He has few seasoned political and economic advisers and no experience in government , other than plotting to overthrow an elected president .
Even worse , he has shown no signs that he has a plan for rescuing the troubled country , reeling from decades of corruption and a recent drop in oil prices .
Latin America 's oldest civilian democracy is at a crossroads .
It must decide whether to choose Chavez 's fiery rhetoric of antiestablishment , antiglobalization , and antigovernment populism -- or Henrique Salas Romer , a centrist former governor and Yale -trained economist who also lambastes Venezuela 's legacy of corrupt government .
Although polls show Chavez with leads ranging anywhere from 5 percent to 15 percent , such measures often are unreliable in Venezuela because many poor voters do not have phones .
No matter who wins , the results of these elections will be felt well beyond the country 's warm Caribbean shores .
Venezuela , which produces about 3 billion barrels of oil a day , is one of the largest suppliers to the United States , providing 16 percent of the country 's total petroleum .
Before this year 's financial crisis , it also had been one of Latin America 's shining stars in privatizing stagnant state monopolies and attracting billions of dollars in foreign investment .
But for the time being , Venezuela 's economic promise has been overshadowed by its political uncertainty .
US officials worry that Chavez , if elected , could drive the country to ruin , scare away foreign businesses , and perhaps become Latin America 's newest dictator .
Already he has appeared in Cuba with Fidel Castro and pledged to dissolve Venezuela 's congress and its supreme court and replace it with a constituent assembly .
Meanwhile , business executives from Houston to Boston wonder whether Venezuela 's wheezing economy might soon close its doors to the outside world .
`` Obviously , many of the things -LRB- Chavez -RRB- has said raise questions , '' said Bernard Aronson , a former US State Department official who now leads a company that invests in South America .
`` Anybody who is thinking about investing in Venezuela is going to wait and see what the rules of the game will be . ''
Howard Wiarda , a political scientist at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst and a senior associate at Washington 's Center for Strategic and International Studies , says the prospect of a Chavez victory and the possibility of authoritarian rule do n't bode well for Latin America .
`` This is a very difficult situation , '' Wiarda said .
`` One of the most developed countries in the region might elect a populist president who seems ready to violate every international economic principle we know . ''
How someone like Chavez , 44 , could rise so swiftly from political banishment to the top of Venezuela 's power structure says a lot about this charismatic and enigmatic figure .
A former lieutenant colonel from a working-class family , Chavez has aimed most of his messages at the country 's poor .
His `` Patriotic Pole '' coalition also has drawn support from leftist intellectuals and conservative businessmen -- particularly among the country 's agricultural and manufacturing sector -- who would rather not compete against multinational corporations .
Although his trademark accessory is a cranberry red beret , which he wears while making speeches in small villages and Caracas slums , Chavez is also known for wearing tailored suits and driving a Mercedes - Benz .
He unapologetically refers to the 1992 coup attempt he led as `` a legitimate rebellion for the people . ''
-LRB- He encouraged another overthrow attempt later that year . -RRB-
But more than personality , Chavez 's ascendancy also says a lot about the accumulated anger that most Venezuelans now feel toward their broken political system .
Despite impressive economic growth through most of this decade , the gap between rich and poor in Venezuela , as in many other Latin American countries , has increased dramatically .
Most people blame the government .
About 80 percent of Venezuela 's 23 million people live in poverty .
Billions of dollars in oil revenues have been squandered by the two leading parties , the Democratic Action Party and the Christian Democrats , in corrupt contracts and no-show jobs for the politically connected .
In early 1993 , about a year after Chavez 's failed coup , President Carlos Andres Perez was suspended from office amid allegations he embezzeled $ 17 million from the government .
Meanwhile , basic services , such as health , public safety , and education have decayed even below the levels of other developing countries .
Every weekend , an average of 30 homicides are reported in Caracas .
Medical patients often must sit on beds at hospitals weeks in advance before a doctor performs surgery .
The country 's universities are roundly criticized for graduating barely educated students .
`` A great portion of the population feels the government has not fulfilled its promises , and that is who Chavez now represents , '' said Roberto Briseno Leon , a professor at the Central University of Venezuela in Caracas and director of the Laboratory of Social Sciences .
Michael Skol , a former US ambassador to Venezuela , thinks a Chavez presidency might bring even more problems .
`` The sense that where Chavez wants to go is decidedly backwards and against the modern economy , '' Skol said .
`` If it gets populist , statist , and isolationist , Venezuela will just get poorer and more corrupt . ''
For his part , Salas has tried to maintain an image of independence from Venezuela 's two main parties .
Last week , however , in an unusual turn that illustrated the degree of concern there is about a Chavez victory , both parties dumped their candidates , a septuagenarian party leader and a former Miss Universe , and threw their support to Salas .
With strong support from middle class voters and business leaders , Salas has promised to do for Venezuela what he did as governor in the state of Carabobo , in the heart of the country 's industrial belt .
There , he cracked down on government corruption by halting the theft of medicines and equipment from public hospitals .
He created the country 's only police emergency telephone system and reduced infant mortality in the state by 35 percent .
His administration also inaugurated a low-interest credit program for small businesses , a plan he says he would expand nationally .
But for many watching the election closely , the overriding concern is not so much who wins , but the margin of victory .
Some experts , including State Department officials , predict that a close election may spark unrest by Chavez and his supporters should he lose , or by the military and the political establishment should he win .
`` It would be best for the stability of the country if one of them would win by a large margin , '' Briseno said .
`` A tight race would make for a very uncertain and confused situation , and that 's the worst thing that could happen to Venezuela right now . ''
Richard Chacon reported from Mexico City and David L. Marcus from Washington .
