CARACUS , Venezuela --
Venezuelans swept a former coup-leader , Hugo Chavez , to a historic election victory on Sunday night , delivering him the presidency he failed to seize by force six years ago .
Hoping for an end to decades of poverty amid oil wealth , euphoric supporters of the former paratrooper burst onto the streets and filled them with music , fireworks and blaring horns .
The former lieutenant colonel , who on Sunday defeated a Yale -educated businessman , Henrique Salas Romer , with more than 50 percent of the vote , is the first leader in 40 years who has not come from Venezuela 's dominant political parties .
His meteoric success among legions of disaffected voters smashed the old-line party machinery and fanned fears of leftist dictatorship .
`` We are democrats , and we are going to demonstrate it now , '' he told a television interviewer here Sunday night , smoothing over the hostility that had marked the campaign .
`` We 're not tyrants .
We 're not dictators . ''
Sunday night enthusiastic crowds , many sporting Chavez 's trademark red beret , filled a main avenue and shouted , `` Viva Venezuela !
Viva Chavez ! ''
They chanted demands to rewrite the 1961 Constitution , which had bolstered the rule of the elite for the four decades of Venezuela 's democracy .
`` Chavez : A National Feeling , '' declared a tall yellow banner raised to serve as the triumphant candidate 's backdrop .
As the streets throbbed with the joy of his supporters , nobody was really sure what Venezuela would look like under Chavez , who has been called a nationalist , a Communist , a hero and a would-be dictator .
In the campaign , he frequently sported the red beret of the military special forces he once led to storm the presidential palace and called on supporters to crush `` los corruptos '' on election day .
A fiery orator who has visited Cuba and praised President Fidel Castro , Chavez has become the symbol of hope through radical change for the four out of five Venezuelans who are poor , and the dangerous devil to the 20 percent who do not .
Within minutes of the announcement of his victory , Chavez pledged to seek moderation and foster forgiveness , after a campaign rife with disinformation , innuendo and dirty tricks .
Just days ago , at his closing rally in downtown Caracas , he had warned 700,000 supporters about the prospect they might lose the election through fraud .
On Sunday night , he told his supporters to `` celebrate , but with humility , even with silence , with reflection .
It 's not about sticking your head out of the window , because tomorrow we begin another battle '' to rebuild Venezuela , he said .
He called on Venezuelans to build `` with harmony , and with a great capacity for forgiveness . ''
`` To those who have made mistakes , we say , ` So did we . '
Let 's forgive each other our errors , '' Chavez said .
With 78 percent of the vote counted , Chavez had 56 percent compared to 40 percent for Salas , according to official results from the National Electoral Council .
In conceding defeat , Salas struck a similarly conciliatory note .
`` I want to say to all Venezuelans that not only do I accept my adversary 's victory , I also wish him much luck because his luck is Venezuela 's luck , '' he said .
Chavez called on the banking and private sector to bring back assets and investment capital sent abroad , precisely out of fear he would win Sunday 's election .
Chavez offered to open talks with the private sector , adding , `` Venezuela needs you , it needs friends . ''
He told business leaders he wanted to understand `` how to interpret your expectations , your anxieties , your aspirations . ''
But initially , those appeals seemed to draw little more than skepticism .
Eric Ekvall , a political consultant here , was watching Chavez 's interview with a group of very wary business executives .
When the president-elect called for the repatriation of capital , `` There was a whoop of derisive laughter from the group here , '' Ekvall said .
The reaction , he added , `` sets the tone for how a lot of the business community here is going to react to him in the beginning . ''
Rumors of massive fraud , of a post-election settling of scores , and threats of rioting ran like rivers through the capital in the days leading up to the election on Sunday .
Though Chavez had been leading in election polls by 15 to 22 points , veteran political analysts said on Sunday night they were still surprised that the old parties released their once-iron fisted hold on power under the weight of the democratic will .
`` These are historic elections , '' the American ambassador here , John Maisto , said in an interview with reporters before the Chavez victory .
`` Nothing like these elections has happened in Venezuela 's history . ''
The ambassador also said Washington would `` work with any government , no matter who is elected . ''
Previously , the Clinton administration had denied Chavez a visa , citing his role in the attempted coup , but a State Department spokesman suggested last week that Chavez might have better luck securing a visa next time .
The rejection , he said , `` is in the past , and the future we will deal with at that time . ''
After trying , and failing , to seize power in two attempted coups against Carlos Andres Perez in 1992 , Chavez became a symbol for Venezuelans impatient with corruption and misery amid vast oil wealth .
Chavez went to jail for two years , but Perez lost as well : he was impeached to face corruption charges a year later .
The paratrooper 's popularity grew .
His statements have fallen all over the political map , often depending on his audiences , although he has generally moved toward the center in recent weeks .
Educated Venezuelans doubt Chavez 's devotion to democracy , while the poor say democracy here has been little more than a cover for institutional corruption .
Venezuela is the leading exporter of oil to the United States , and the biggest oil producing country outside the Middle East , but 40 percent of its people live in dire poverty , unable to afford a nourishing diet .
`` We voted Chavez because we want a change , not a dictatorship , '' said Kurokwis Escobar , 35 , who paints cars for a living .
`` Right now , we need a change , '' declared Hughes Castilla Molina , 52 , who owns an auto repair shop .
`` If you say we 're going to lose our liberty , I say we 've lost it already .
At least we 'll have a change .
We 'll have education , health care , and housing , which we do n't have now .
That 's the popular clamor . ''
From the poor hillside slums like Petare to the posh , tree-lined streets of Altamir , Venezuelans turned out in record numbers to vote in an election freighted with a sense of history in the making .
By mid-day , the number of voters at polling stations around Caracas had exceeded the total balloting in congressional and state elections a month ago , when Chavez 's Patriotic Pole won a plurality with a third of the legislature and eight of the 23 governorships .
For 40 years , the two traditional parties , Democratic Action and Copei , had shared the spoils of power in this oil-rich nation , and by the end of voting , their long day in the sun had come to an end .
For the first time , the two parties fielded no candidates for president , and instead threw their support behind Salas in an unsuccessful , last ditch effort to tip the election in his favor .
