CARACAS , Venezuela --
Hugo Chavez spent his first 18 months as president of Venezuela consolidating his power on the domestic front .
Now , with the price of oil nearing $ 40 a barrel and OPEC scheduled to gather here this week for a conference of its heads of state , he is about to step out onto the world stage in a big way .
For those unfamiliar with Venezuela 's president , a 46-year -old former paratrooper who in 1992 led an unsuccessful coup attempt , the experience promises to be overwhelming .
When it comes to international relations , Chavez is a whirlwind of ideas , plans and visions -LRB- as he is with every other subject that interests him -RRB- , and many of these are intended to reshape the world order .
This leaves him often critical of or even hostile to U.S. positions .
`` Venezuela is just too small for him , '' said Michael Shifter , senior fellow at the Inter - American Dialogue , a Washington -based policy analysis group .
`` He fancies himself as a regional and hemispheric leader , wants to play a major role on the global stage , and is testing the limits of how far he can go in terms of pushing his ideas and showing off his posture in global politics . ''
Such ambitions may seem messianic and way out of proportion in a country of modest size and huge economic and social problems .
But Venezuela has twice as many people as Cuba , and Chavez has a pair of arrows in his quiver that his friend and mentor Fidel Castro could never claim : the largest oil reserves outside the Middle East and a long history as a main supplier of gasoline and heating oil to the United States .
That situation of mutual dependence gives Venezuela considerable leverage in its dealings with the United States , and Chavez , by arranging to have his energy minister named the president of OPEC , has been skillful in using oil as an instrument of foreign policy .
As befits a former soldier , his own view of the world and how it should be shaped is strongly colored by geopolitical and strategic considerations .
`` The 20th century was a bipolar century , but the 21st is not going to be unipolar , '' he vowed in a speech here in August .
`` The 21st century should be multipolar , and we all ought to push for the development of such a world .
So long live a united Asia , a united Africa , a united Europe. `` On this , as in several other areas , Chavez 's views are similar to those of one of his early advisers , a neo-fascist Argentine theorist named Norberto Ceresole , who contends that Latin America must forge alliances with the Middle East and Asia to counterbalance the power of the United States and what he -LRB- but not Chavez -RRB- calls `` the Jewish financial mafia . ''
In its opposition to American hegemony , this view has something in common with those of countries like France and above all China , with whom Chavez has sought closer ties .
`` Soviet power has collapsed , but that does not mean that neoliberal capitalism has to be the model followed by the peoples of the West , '' he said during a visit to Beijing last fall .
`` If only for that reason , we invite China to keep its flag flying , because this world cannot be run by a universal police force that seeks to control everything . ''
In more concrete terms , Chavez believes that `` his mission in the world is to restore some sort of equilibrium that favors less developed countries , '' said Janet Kelly , a professor at the Institute of Higher Administrative Studies in Caracas who is working on a book about Venezuelan - American relations .
`` When you combine that with his liking of the center stage , it means he is going to be acting constantly to promote any movement in the world that goes against what he would perceive as the U.S. -dominated agenda . ''
One key to pursuing that goal is closer ties with what he calls `` our 10 partners , friends and brothers in OPEC . ''
In August , Chavez visited all the OPEC countries to invite their leaders to the summit meeting this week , raising hackles in Washington when he became the first head of state to call on Saddam Hussein in Baghdad since the gulf war and when , during a stop in Libya , he described Moammar Gadhafi as his ally .
`` In geopolitical terms , the OPEC tour was masterful , '' said Riordan Roett , director of the Western Hemisphere Program at Johns Hopkins University .
`` It demonstrated that Venezuela was not just a Latin American backwater . ''
He added that while the State Department may have complained about the Iraq trip , `` more people in the Third World now know about Chavez than they do about any other Latin American leader except Fidel Castro . ''
Chavez 's relationship with the Cuban leader is complex .
While he said last year that Venezuela and Cuba are swimming together `` towards the same sea of happiness and of real social justice and peace , '' he also seems to realize that Castro 's star has faded , leaving a vacuum that he , with all his eloquence , exuberance and personal warmth , can perhaps fill .
`` There is admiration for Fidel , but it is linked not so much to Cuba 's domestic system , which I do not think Chavez is interested in trying out , as it is adopting some of Fidel 's style , such as the David against Goliath stance and the sense of humor that galls the other side , '' Kelly said .
`` He is more a student of Fidel the defiant than Fidel the Communist . ''
Like Castro , Chavez seems to enjoy nothing more than tweaking the United States , which Washington , in a reflection of Venezuela 's importance as an oil supplier , thus far has generally endured with patience .
But there are real policy differences , too .
Chavez has withdrawn the Venezuelan military from regional naval exercises in the Caribbean and refused to allow U.S. planes monitoring drug trafficking to fly in Venezuelan airspace .
Washington 's decision to use $ 1.3 billion to support Colombia 's government in its war against guerrillas and drug dealers promises to make the relationship even more difficult .
Some of Chavez 's former associates accuse him of supplying guns to leftist Colombian insurgents known as the FARC .
He has denied that , but has also made it clear that he dislikes the U.S. -sponsored Plan Colombia , warning that it may lead to `` the Vietnamization of the entire Amazon region '' and describing the helicopters Washington is sending to the Colombian government as `` death machines . ''
`` In reality , Hugo Chavez and his government are on the side of the FARC , '' Richard Gott writes in `` The Shadow of the Liberator : The Impact of Hugo Chavez on Venezuela and Latin America '' -LRB- Verso -RRB- , a new and flattering biography .
`` Chavez wants the FARC to win , or at any rate to be so successful in the peace negotiations that its incorporation into the government will entirely change the political complexion of Colombia . ''
Chavez 's principal intellectual hero is Simon Bolivar , the hero of South American independence who dreamed of and fought for a united continent .
Chavez has argued for the formation of a South Atlantic Treaty Organization , a Latin American counterpart to the International Monetary Fund and a single currency for all of South America , but he clearly wants more .
`` The idea of a reunified America , of a Bolivarian America , has arisen again , '' he said in a speech in July on the Liberator 's birthday .
And to Hugo Chavez , there is a natural leader of that movement -- himself .
