MEXICO CITY , May 28 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The following is a brief summary of the main economic news in Latin America over the last three days : Cuba , Italy Set up Joint Company in Health , Tourism HAVANA -- Cuba and Italy are to set up a joint venture health and beauty tourist complex called Mediclub with an investment of 16 million U.S. dollars .
The project will involve upgrading technology for the complex .
This island nation has signed 16 joint tourist projects since the United States tightened its economic blockade against the country on March 12 in retaliation for the shooting down of two civilian planes .
World Bank Approves Big Loan to Ecuador QUITO -- The World Bank approved a 15 million-dollar loan for an environmental technical assistance project in Ecuador .
The project is to provide technical assistance for the environmental departments of local authorities , help formulate regional environmental policies and support a series of environmental projects along the Portoviejo River .
Brazil Wants to Buy Petroleum From Iraq BRASILIA -- Brazil may negotiate with Iraq over the importation of 20,000-30,000 barrels of oil per day , the president of the state-owned oil company Petrobras said .
Mendes Rennoh made the proposal to Brazilian Mining and Energy Minister Raimundo Brito ahead of the Third Conference on Energy in Latin America and the Caribbean held in Rio de Janeiro .
Exports Drop 15.5 Percent in Venezuela CARACAS -- Venezuela 's exports fell 15.5 percent in the first four months of this year to 1.26 billion U.S. dollars , the country 's Central Statistics And Database Bureau said .
Metal exports , which account for 35 percent of total exports , saw the largest drop of 23 percent to 976 million dollars .
The United States , Colombia , Japan , Mexico and Holland are the main buyers of Venezuelan exports .
Foreign Investments Increase 19 Percent in Colombia SANTA FE DE BOGOTA -- Foreign investment in Colombia reached 159 million dollars in the first two months this year , an increase of 19 percent over the same period in 1995 .
Argentine Industrial Output Recovers in April BUENOS AIRES -- Argentina 's industrial output increased 5.3 percent in April over the same month in 1995 , but overall , output during the first four months fell 4.3 percent over the 1995 level , the Latin American Economic Research Foundation said .
Production in 11 of the 19 sectors of the industrial production index fell in the first four months of 1996 , but output levels in the eight other sectors increased .
Mexico 's Sugar Production Increases in Early 1996 MEXICO CITY -- Mexico 's production of sugar rose 6.6 percent to 178,765 tons during the first five months this year over the same period in 1995 .
The National Chamber of Sugar and Alcohol Industries estimated that by the end of the 1995-96 cycle total sugar production will reach 441,642 tons .
Fiat to Invest in Brazilian Truck Factory BRASILIA -- Italian automaker Fiat is to invest 500 million U.S. dollars in Brazil to build a truck factory , the company 's international manager said .
The company will invest another 150 million dollars at the end of the year to build a hydroelectric power plant in the state of Minas Gerais .
Most Venezuelan Businesses Suffer Reduced Production CARACAS -- Sixty percent of Venezuelan businesses cut production by half in the first quarter of 1996 , a survey shows .
Inflation was one of the main causes of the reduction .
Some 15 percent of those polled blamed higher costs and shrinking purchasing power for the drop in production .
Cereals Output to Drop 30 Percent in Venezuela CARACAS -- The production of rice , sorghum and maize will drop 30 percent during the current growing cycle due to the high costs of planting and other economic problems facing farmers .
Eduardo Manuitt , a leader of the National Federation of Agricultural Associations , said the costs of planting have risen 141 percent because of price increases for fertilizer and other necessary raw materials .
