BEIJING , February 20 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Chinese Vice - Premier and Foreign Minister Qian Qichen held talks here this afternoon with visiting Venezuelan Foreign Minister Miguel A. Burelli Rivas , and both later co-chaired the second political consultation between the two foreign ministries .
On behalf of the Venezuelan government and people , Burelli first expressed his profound sympathies over the death of Deng Xiaoping , the former revolutionary leader who died on Wednesday .
He said that Deng made great contributions not only to the prosperity of China , but also to world peace , and that he will be remembered forever .
Expressing thanks for Burelli 's comment , Qian said that the Chinese people will continue along the path of building socialism with Chinese characteristics , a path initiated by Deng Xiaoping .
During the talks , Qian welcomed Burelli to China , saying that in the past few years the friendship and cooperation between China and Venezuela has been healthy and developed smoothly .
There have been more high-level exchanges and mutual trust has deepened , Qian went on to say , adding that Chinese Premier Li Peng 's successful visit to Venezuela last November promoted bilateral relations to a new level .
On bilateral economic and trade cooperation , Qian noted that the two economies are highly complementary , and the development momentum is good .
The Chinese side is interested in conducting cooperation with Venezuela in fields of energy , mining , agriculture and forestry , he said .
He emphasized the cooperation in cut oil , holding that bilateral involvement in this regard will lead to a brighter future for Sino - Venezuelan ties .
Praising bilateral ties in international affairs , Qian said that China and Venezuela , as two developing countries , share the same or similar views on many important international issues and have experienced very good cooperation in international organizations .
He said that the Chinese government appreciates the Venezuelan government 's support for China 's entry into the World Trade Organization and the Inter - American Development Bank .
He also expressed the Chinese government 's appreciation for Venezuelan government 's `` one China '' position on the question of Taiwan .
Saying he is satisfied with the development of Venezuela - China relations , Burelli said that the two countries have had frequent exchanges and bilateral relations are becoming ever closer , especially in light of Li Peng 's visit to Venezuela last year , which greatly pushed forward the further development of bilateral relations .
He continued that the two countries have much in common in bilateral and multi-lateral affairs , and the prospect for bilateral cooperation in energy is encouraging .
