PANAMA CITY -- The Panamanian economy grew three percent in the first five months of this year , surpassing all forecasts , said Panamanian Planning and Economic Policy Vice Minister Carlos Vallarino .
The items that contributed to this increase were milk sales up 9.3 percent , sugar 13.8 percent , industrial energy 5.4 percent and cargo moved through the Panama Canal , 17.5 percent .
Venezuelan Non - Traditional Exports Drop CARACAS -- Venezuelan goods exported so far this year , not counting oil , brought in 1.9 billion dollars , 16.2 percent less than the 2.275 billion dollars registered during the same period last year , the Statistics and Informatics Central Bureau -LRB- OCEI -RRB- reported .
Common metals , the biggest export , accounted for 42 percent of the total , a 24 percent decrease compared to last year .
Chemicals were next at 12.7 percent .
According to press reports , the Interamerican Development Bank agreed to provide a loan of 10.5 million dollars to update the country 's national tax and customs system .
The loan will be repaid in 20 years , at an interest now of 6.89 percent per year , with 36 months grace and a variable interest rate .
The reports say the bank signed in April a memorandum of understanding pledging to grant loans of up to one billion dollars to support public and financial reforms in Venezuela .
Brazilian Budget Deficit Rises BRASILIA -- The Brazilian federal government budget deficit rose to 5.8 billion dollars during the first half of the year , say informed economic sources .
The national deficit of the same period in 1995 was 519 million dollars , 11 times less than that of this year when personnel expenses increased by 12 percent and payment of debt interests went up to 45 percent .
Cuban Economy Grows 9.6 Percent in First Half Year HAVANA -- The Cuban economy grew 9.6 percent from January to June this year and has kept the momentum of recovery , the Council of the State Vice President Carlos Lage said Wednesday .
He said Cuba 's economy kept increasing despite the U.S. Helms - Burton law , which imposes sanctions against the island , and unfavorable tariffs in the international market .
Industry increased by 10 percent , agriculture 20 percent and construction 30 percent .
Trade between Mexico and Israel in 1995 MEXICO CITY -- Mexican exports to Israel were valued 10.5 million dollars in 1995 .
They were fertilizers , minerals , medicines made with albumin , machinery for agricultural irrigation , and citric acid .
Its imports from the Jewish country were worth 46.6 million dollars , goods including coffee concentrates , malt beer , machinery electrical parts , chick-peas , and unprocessed coffee beans .
The two countries might sign a free trade agreement this year , according to Israeli Ambassador to Mexico Moshe Melamed .
Andean Countries Increase Exports to Colombia SANTAFE DE BOGOTA -- Andean countries ' exports to Colombia have kept increasing and were worth 2.134 billion dollars at the end of the first half of this year .
The Colombian Institute of Foreign Trade reported that Venezuela and Ecuador were Colombia 's main trade partners in South America .
Venezuelan exports reached 1.652 billion dollars , Ecuador 's 349.7 million dollars , and Peru 's 84.1 million dollars .
