CARACAS , July 30 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez said Monday that there is a change in Venezuela with the beginning of a new era after Sunday 's general elections , in which he is the winner .
ENC , the Electoral National Council , in its Monday morning report , said that Chavez got 56.59 percent of the votes casted , that is , 3.134 million votes .
Chavez 's main competitor , his former comrade , Francisco Arias , got 38 percent of the votes or 2.022 million votes .
Abstention reached a 43.39 percent level -LRB- 4.273 million -RRB- .
The fundamental alliance of the Patriotic Pole -LRB- MVR - MAS -RRB- , of Chavez , obtained 60 percent of the National Assembly , but not the two thirds needed to achieve the majority .
Chavez candidates beat nine opposition governors looking for election in July 30 elections .
According to the ENC , Patriotic Pole alliance won in the state of New Sparta and held Barinas , Delta Amacuro , Lara and Aragua .
All in all , Patriotic Pole got 14 out of the 23 governorships during the elections , not including the metropolitan mayor 's office .
Arias , former governor of the state of Zulia , did not rejected the results nor mentioned the possibility of fraud .
Chavez , who will have a new six-year presidential period after a year and a half in the Presidency , reached power with a strong popular support from the poor .
Arias 's ideas are more moderate and have a stronger support from the entrepreneurial sector and the rich .
Anti -corruption stances and a change in the socio-economic program to fight off poverty and unemployment , affected people displeased at former governments and traditional parties , virtually erased of the political environment .
The Venezuelan leader said that last elections baptized the new republic born after the popular constituent process .
Venezuela has a new horizon , said Chavez , who considered Sunday elections as the most important one in Venezuela 's history , because a new , legitimate republic has been born .
Chavez made a call to the union and reiterated his promises to reactivate economy .
He made a call to `` all Venezuelans of good will to unite , work , for only united we can recover Venezuela .
Venezuela is of everyone , we all sail in this same ship . ''
In a message to his competitors and to entrepreneurs , Chavez made a call to them to put aside all lesser interests and to put above all national interest so that Venezuela can overcome its problems .
President Chavez said that during his next presidential term he will put aside political confrontation to center his attention in social and economic recovery of the country .
The President 's economic recovery plan is ambitious , taking into account the severe economic recession and the deterioration of living conditions among Venezuelans .
Chavez 's main challenge will be the recovery of Venezuela 's damaged economy which , last year ended with a contraction of 7.2 percent .
Crime and a high unemployment level are the main problems affecting Venezuelans .
