WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- The State Department today issued a blanket warning to U.S. citizens worldwide against possible terrorist action surrounding Saturday 's first anniversary of two U.S. Embassy bombings in Africa .
`` Americans should keep a low profile , vary routes and times for all required travel and treat mail from unfamiliar sources with suspicion , '' said the statement , labeled a `` worldwide caution . ''
Although the notice cited the Aug. 7 bombings and U.S. bombing raids against terrorist sites 13 days later , it said the public announcement was not in response to any particular threat or event but to emphasize a continuing concern .
`` The Department of State continues to receive reports that prompt concern about the safety and security of both official U.S. government personnel and private American citizens , '' said the notice .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The notice also cited a potential for retaliatory acts against U.S. citizens in response to the worldwide pursuit and apprehension of alleged associates of Osama bin Laden , who is charged as mastermind of the bombings in Kenya and Tanzania that killed 224 people , including 12 Americans</ENAMEX> .
The warning came a day after officials said U.S. diplomats are safer now , even though a majority of embassies remain vulnerable to car bombs .
The State Department has spent $ 1.5 billion rebuilding and enhancing security at posts around the world since the African bombings .
With 4,000 additional local guards and more than 200 top security personnel added around the world , all diplomats now have an adequate `` baseline level of protection , '' said Peter Bergin , head of the Diplomatic Security Service .
But Bergin and other top officials responsible for counterterrorism and diplomatic security acknowledged Wednesday that American outposts remain vulnerable .
They said only 31 of 270 embassies and consulates are adequately shielded and set back safely from potential car bombs .
`` These are big , big bombs that we 're having to counter .
It makes our job difficult , but it 's something that we are attempting to , striving to deter , '' Bergin said .
`` We 've made improvements at every single post around the world . ''
The officials briefed reporters in the heavily protected State Department , which has been ringed by concrete and steel barriers since the bombings .
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright is to host ceremonies marking the first anniversary of the Aug. 7 embassy bombings in the building on Saturday .
Since the bombings , department analysts estimate 2,400 threats or incidents have been aimed at U.S. interests overseas -- more than double the same period a year ago .
Nearly 70 embassies or consulates have been closed for 24 hours or more in response to security concerns or specific threats since the bombings , said Patrick Kennedy , assistant secretary of state for administration .
All except the embassy in Dushanbe , Tajikistan , which officials say cannot be defended , were open this week .
Security experts cite several factors that they believe have helped keep terrorists at bay : Last year 's U.S. missile assaults against camps in Afghanistan and a factory in Sudan , the posting of $ 5 million rewards , a series of charges and arrest of eight bin Laden associates , sanctions against countries harboring terrorists and a range of `` disruption tactics '' against terrorist groups by the CIA .
Despite the threats and rising concern for U.S. vulnerability , terrorist incidents are on the decline globally and U.S. officials agree that state-sponsored terrorism has waned .
But bin Laden , who denies ordering the African bombings , is n't the only perceived threat .
Followers of Kurdish rebel leader Abdullah Ocalan , sentenced to death by Turkey , blame his capture partly on help from U.S. intelligence .
In all , the State Department lists 55 terrorist groups around the globe , with 40 percent of incidents last year targeting Americans .
In spreading instances of diplomatic jitters , suspicious surveillance of the embassy in Madagascar , a phoned threat in Chad , and concern over the vulnerability of other African embassies led to closures of at least six missions in the weeks before the anniversary .
U.S. consulates in Istanbul and Adana , Turkey , were closed temporarily in June after the Ocalan death sentence .
