DAR ES SALAAM , Tanzania
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright headed Tuesday to East Africa , seeking to demonstrate American support after the bombings that targeted U.S. embassies , but mostly claimed African lives .
`` To America 's embassy personnel in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam , I will bring a message of solidarity in their sorrow , admiration for their courage and support for their continued efforts on behalf of our country , '' Albright said Monday before leaving Andrews Air Force Base , Maryland .
`` To the people of Kenya and Tanzania , I will bring a message of friendship , made deeper by our shared grief , and of support in doing all we can to ease their suffering and help them start anew . ''
Albright , after a 16-hour flight , is scheduled to spend only five hours on the ground in Dar es Salaam , Tanzania , her first stop Tuesday morning , and then about 5 1/2 hours in Nairobi , Kenya , later in the day before returning immediately home .
Albright 's visit to East Africa was designed in part to demonstrate U.S. resolve in the face of growing terrorist threats to Americans .
Some Kenyans have complained that after the Nairobi bombing , rescuers gave priority to finding American victims and to protecting evidence at the expense of saving African lives .
But Albright and other U.S. officials have strongly disputed that notion , saying the priority had been rescuing all possible , African and American .
On Friday , when Albright set aside vacation plans for the hastily planned trip to East Africa , the State Department lifted a warning against travel to Kenya , whose economy relies heavily on foreign visitors , to further ease any strain in the aftermath of the tragedy .
Just ahead of Albright 's one-day trip , the State Department on Sunday issued an updated `` worldwide caution '' to U.S. travelers in the aftermath of the Aug. 7 bombings at American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania and because of fresh threats to U.S. interests abroad .
An accompanying statement specifically warned `` against all travel to Pakistan . ''
The State Department also ordered the departure of all non-emergency personnel and families of employees from the embassy at Islamabad and from U.S. consulates in Karachi , Lahore and Peshawar .
The warnings came after <ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Pakistan handed over to Kenyan officials a suspect in the U.S. Embassy bombings , Mohammed Saddiq Odeh , also known as Mohammad Sadiq Howaida and Abdull Bast Awadh</ENAMEX> .
The first batch of evidence from the Nairobi bombing arrived over the weekend at the FBI lab at the bureau 's Washington headquarters and is being analyzed , FBI officials said Monday .
Many more shipments are expected , but the first batch contained cotton swabs taken at the blast site in hopes of picking up microscopic residues that could positively identify what the bomb was made of .
A U.S. official said last week that field tests suggested the presence of a Czech -made plastic explosive called Semtex that has been used by terrorist groups before .
