NAIROBI , Kenya
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Acting on information from a suspect in the U.S. Embassy bombing , investigators raided a Nairobi hotel where the explosive was believed to have been made</ENAMEX> , a Kenyan newspaper reported Wednesday .
The Daily Nation said the raid was carried out Tuesday morning by 15 FBI agents and six Kenyan detectives wearing bulletproof vests who carried away several boxes .
Meanwhile , a Pakistani newspaper reported Wednesday that the suspect held in Nairobi gave a detailed account of worldwide anti- American operations by a secretive Muslim guerrilla group based in Afghanistan .
Kenyan police and U.S. authorities declined comment on the latest reported developments .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">If true , the two reports signify a major breakthrough in the investigation into the Aug. 7 bombings that killed 257 people at U.S. embassies in Nairobi and in Dar es Salaam , Tanzania</ENAMEX> .
In Pakistan , <ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">a border official said a Saudi and a Sudanese were detained at the Afghan border and were being questioned about the bombings</ENAMEX> .
The men were stopped Saturday , said Bakhtiar Khan , chief of the Pakistani border post near the northern city of Peshwar .
The New York Times also reported Wednesday that a Saudi and a Sudanese were arrested at the Afghan border .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The newspaper said Odeh had named the men as accomplices</ENAMEX> .
The Nairobi newspaper report said a bomb consisting of 800 kilograms of TNT was assembled over a period of several days in rooms 102 and 107 of the hotel , the paper said , citing unidentified sources .
It reported that the raid occurred at the Hill Top Hotel , which was not listed in the Nairobi telephone directory .
However , a man who answered the telephone at the Hilltop Lodge and identified himself as the night clerk , Omar Jana , told The Associated Press on Wednesday that agents had stormed that site the day before .
Jana said police arrested manager James Nganga and took the hotel 's guest register .
The agents were acting on information provided by Mohammed Saddiq Odeh , who was arrested Aug. 7 in Pakistan and returned Aug. 14 to Kenyan authorities investigating the cause of the Aug. 7 blast , according to the paper .
The bomb , at a busy intersection in downtown Nairobi , killed 247 people , among them 12 Americans .
The newspaper report was the first word of the raid .
FBI , Kenyan and Tanzanian police were remaining largely mum on the progress of their investigation into <ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">the nearly simultaneous bombings in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam , Tanzania</ENAMEX> .
`` I know nothing about it , '' embassy spokesman Bill Barr said .
Frank Scafidi , an FBI spokesman in Washington , said he could not confirm the newspaper 's report .
`` It 's entirely possible , I just do n't know .
I do n't have anything now , '' he said .
The report said the two hotel rooms reportedly were occupied from Aug. 3-7 by four foreigners involved in the bombing -- two Palestinians , an Egyptian and a Saudi Arabian .
On the day of the bombing , they were said to have completed the final assembly in a pick-up truck and driven the bomb across the city to the U.S. embassy downtown .
Citing unidentified sources , the newspaper said Odeh was the chief assembler of the bomb , and flew out of Naoribi Aug. 6 after ensuring that the final preparation were in place .
It said he is believed to have had five accomplices , three of whom died in the bombing , with the other two still at large .
In Islamabad , <ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The News said Odeh , during a week of questioning by Pakistani intelligence officials before he was handed over to Kenya last Friday , revealed that he is a member of a secretive guerrilla group led by Saudi dissident Osama bin Laden</ENAMEX> , who is in hiding in Afghanistan .
Odeh claimed the group has carried out successful operations against U.S. interests in countries including Somalia , Saudi Arabia and Pakistan , the newspaper said .
Odeh , identified as a 34-year -old Palestinian engineer , reportedly claimed to be an expert at handling shoulder-fired U.S. Stinger missiles .
The United States supplied such missiles and to Afghan forces fighting a Soviet invasion in their country in the 1980s , and bin Laden was among the foreigners who fought alongside Afghans .
Odeh , according to The News report , said bin Laden sent him and others to Somalia to fight U.S. peacekeepers sent there , and they used Stingers to shoot down U.S. military .
U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright , who flew back to Washington after stops in Dar es Salaam and Nairobi on a whirlwind trip to show U.S. support , has expressed satisfaction with the investigative work done so far , but she said she did n't expect answers overnight .
`` The investigation , I think , is proceeding fairly well , thanks to a good degree of cooperation by Kenya and Tanzania , '' she said in Nairobi .
Kenyans said a mournful goodbye Tuesday to Rose Wanjiku Mwangi , 36 , who struggled for life in vain under the bombed-out rubble of the U.S. Embassy while the world watched and waited for five days .
As Rose was being mourned and buried , Albright toured the rubble of the two bombed-out embassy sites .
She pledged to seek emergency funding from Congress next month to pay for re-establishing embassy operations in Tanzania and Kenya and to compensate families that `` suffered irreparable harm . ''
-LRB- sl/dc -RRB-
