In the spring of 1998 , Prudence Bushnell , the U.S. ambassador to Kenya , sent an emotional letter to Secretary of State Madeleine Albright begging for the secretary 's personal help .
Ms. Bushnell , a career diplomat , had been fighting for months for a more secure embassy in the face of mounting terrorist threats and a warning that she was the target of an assassination plot .
The department had repeatedly refused to grant her request , citing a lack of money .
But that kind of response , she wrote Albright , was `` endangering the lives of embassy personnel . ''
The CIA and the FBI had been amassing increasingly ominous and detailed clues about potential threats in Kenya , officials said .
But the State Department bureaucracy still dismissed Ms. Bushnell .
She was even seen by some at the State Department as a nuisance who was overly obsessed with security , according to one official .
Albright took no action .
And three months later , <ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">on Aug. 7 , the American Embassies in Tanzania and Kenya were simultaneously attacked with car bombs</ENAMEX> .
Twelve American diplomats and 254 Africans were killed in Kenya .
The State Department has acknowledged that Ms. Bushnell raised questions about security before the bombing .
But a close examination of events in the year before the assaults , based on interviews with officials throughout the U.S. government , shows her concerns were more intense , more well-founded , more specific , and more forcefully expressed than has previously been known .
The review shows that : -- The CIA repeatedly told State Department officials in Washington and <ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">in the Kenya Embassy that there was an active terrorist cell in Kenya connected to Osama bin Laden , the Saudi exile who is accused of masterminding the attack</ENAMEX> .
-- The CIA and FBI investigated at least three terrorist threats in Nairobi in the year before the bombing and took one seriously enough to send a counter-terrorism team from CIA headquarters .
The agency ultimately concluded that threat was unfounded , but some officials believe the inquiry was botched , and the agency 's inspector general is investigating how it was handled .
-- State Department officials brushed aside Gen. Anthony Zinni , commander of the U.S. Central Command , who had visited Nairobi on his own and warned that the Nairobi embassy was an easy and tempting target for terrorists .
Zinni 's offer to send his own specialists to review security in Nairobi was turned down by the State Department .
-- The State Department had all but abandoned the commitment it made after the 1983 bombing of the Beirut embassy to improve embassy security .
Department officials had long since stopped asking Capitol Hill for the money needed to meet its own standards , and had adopted a strategy of improving the handful of embassies it believed were at greatest risk .
Nairobi was not one of them .
Ms. Bushnell , in her first interview about the bombing , said by telephone from Nairobi on Friday : `` This is a tragedy in the real sense of the word , and it 's a tragedy that has caused us to think differently .
We no longer operate under the assumptions that we did in the past . ''
A report made public Friday by a commission appointed by Albright excoriated the State Department for failing to safeguard American missions against terrorist attacks , particularly for the practice of giving vulnerable missions like the one in Nairobi lower priority when experience shows they make tempting targets for terrorists .
But the report , signed by Adm. William Crowe , former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , concluded that `` intelligence provided no immediate tactical warning of the August 7 attacks . ''
Still , classified cable traffic and intelligence reports , which were not included in the public version of Crowe 's report , show that while none of the warnings gathered by American intelligence in the year before the bombings pointed to a particular act of terrorism on a particular day , the United States had growing evidence that the embassy was a target of terrorist plots , and that terrorists hostile to American interests were active in Kenya .
State Department officials say it is impossible to respond to each terrorist threat it receives .
In addition , State Department officials assert that even if Ms. Bushnell 's requests had been granted , a new embassy could not have been in place in time to prevent the attack in August .
They also said they were told at the time by the CIA that the threats in Nairobi had either proved unfounded or had been dealt with by Kenyan authorities .
Administration officials said Ms. Bushnell began raising concerns about the embassy 's security soon after her arrival in Nairobi in 1996 .
She sent two cables to headquarters in December 1997 , outlining the dangers and asking for a new embassy .
Her request was not seriously considered , officials said , when senior State Department officials met in January 1998 at the State Department to set a budget for embassy construction in the coming year .
`` It did n't come up on the radar screen , '' said one senior administration official .
This prompted Ms. Bushnell to try her end-run with Albright .
In memos sent in April and May , she asked Albright to cite Nairobi 's vulnerability to Congress in seeking more funds for security .
In addition , Ms. Bushnell was lobbying every senior American official and member of Congress who came to Nairobi .
The ambassador would say , `` How do you like our building ?
I think it 's terrible , '' according to an American official .
Ms. Bushnell `` did not want to be in that building , '' the official said .
While none of the terrorist threats investigated by the CIA panned out , they focused Ms. Bushnell 's attention on just how vulnerable her embassy was .
`` If you know there is a viper 's nest around , then that gives you pause , '' one State Department official said .
By the mid-1990s , the global investigation touched off by the 1993 World Trade Center bombing had focused on bin Laden and his associates .
FBI agents from New York were hard at work building a criminal case against the Saudi exile .
At the same time , the CIA was tracking the group 's movements and finances in hopes of preventing attacks .
One trail led to Kenya where the agency discovered that bin Laden 's operatives were living in the country .
Intelligence officials say they briefed Ms. Bushnell about the presence of the group in early 1997 but told her there was no evidence of a specific threat against the embassy or American interests in Kenya .
In the summer of 1997 , American intelligence officials began to look more closely at what bin Laden was doing in Africa .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">The CIA identified an intriguing suspect : Wadih el Hage , a Lebanese -born American citizen in Kenya who was believed to have close ties to the leadership of bin Laden 's group</ENAMEX> .
American officials prodded their Kenyan counterparts to raid el Hage 's home in Nairobi , an overture that was shared with Ms. Bushnell and others in the embassy .
Kenyan police , accompanied by the CIA and FBI , searched the house in August 1997 .
They found his computer , downloaded its files , and read a letter describing the existence of an `` East African cell '' of bin Laden 's group .
The author of the letter mentioned recent attempts by American intelligence to investigate the group 's Kenyan operations and alluded to its role in attacking American soldiers in Somalia a few years earlier .
According to the document , the group had moved a cache of incriminating files from el Hage 's house and hidden them elsewhere .
That reference set off alarm bells .
American officials suspected that the missing files might contain evidence of an upcoming attack by bin Laden 's Kenyan operatives .
The working theory , officials said , was that such a plot would be aimed at another country , with Nairobi used as a `` jumping off point . ''
A law enforcement official said American investigators began a `` somewhat frantic , concerted effort '' to locate the missing files .
`` The concern was high enough about something being out there to go right away , '' the official said .
As part of that effort , a second search was conducted in Kenya at another location in September 1997 .
This time , a State Department official from the embassy joined the CIA , FBI and Kenyans .
No files were found .
The FBI interviewed el Hage , who had moved to the United States , three times , but he professed to know little of bin Laden or his activities in Kenya .
Today , el Hage is in jail in New York , awaiting trial on charges of lying in those interviews and conspiring with bin Laden to kill Americans abroad .
He has not been directly linked to the bombings in Kenya , but has been accused of being one of the Saudi exile 's chief lieutenants , responsible for setting up front companies in Kenya and seeking components for chemical weapons .
He has pleaded not guilty .
Still , the CIA and FBI believed at the time that they had uncovered a potentially dangerous terrorist group linked to bin Laden .
State Department officials insist that they were not told of this and stress that they were given only a `` fragmentary '' understanding of the reasons for the raid on el Hage 's house .
The officials said they were told only that the CIA was assisting a criminal investigation by the New York FBI .
`` At no time were we told he was connected to Osama bin Laden or to any threat against U.S. interests in Kenya , '' a senior State Department official said .
Another State Department official said : `` If we had known there was a significant bin Laden network in Kenya we would have gotten our people the hell out of that building . ''
Intelligence and law enforcement officials strongly dispute the State Department 's assertions .
The State Department , said one intelligence official , was briefed about the presence of bin Laden 's operatives in Kenya `` before , during and after '' the August 1997 raid on el Hage 's house .
Over the next year , intelligence officials said the CIA sent the State Department numerous reports detailing the activities of el Hage and others linked to bin Laden in Kenya .
`` Some of those reports referred to Osama bin Laden in the first paragraph , '' recalled one U.S. intelligence official .
