ATLANTA -- Upgrading security at U.S. embassies overseas to protect them from terrorist attacks has been a work-in-progress for nearly 20 years .
Ever since Iranian radicals invaded the U.S. embassy in Tehran in 1979 and held 52 Americans hostage for 444 days , State Department officials have been trying to make those foreign outposts more secure .
But the security has not always come quickly enough .
In Beirut , Lebanon , terrorists struck twice at the U.S. embassy with deadly consequences in 1983 and 1984 .
In addition , a truck bomb exploded at a military barracks in Beirut in 1983 , killing 241 Americans .
More recently , a terrorist truck bomb that blew up outside an American military housing high-rise in Dhahran , Saudi Arabia , killing 19 military personnel , prompted yet another security review and upgrade of embassies and other facilities .
But the level of security at any embassy is usually dependent on the level of threat perceived .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">The U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania , hit Friday by deadly car bomb blasts less than five minutes apart</ENAMEX> , apparently were not perceived as high-risk .
`` These were soft targets , '' said Bob Heibel , director of the Research/Intelligence Analyst Program at Mercyhurst College in Erie , Pa .
Heibel , formerly the FBI 's No. 2 man in counter-terrorism , said terrorists generally look for targets that are easy to attack and where they will can get the maximum amount of damage for a minimum amount of risk .
`` After the bombings in Beirut , there was a real hardening of State Department targets overseas .
I would imagine they had a priority list for doing that and it would be interesting to see where these two embassies were on the list , '' Heibel said .
Brent Brown , a president of Chesley Brown Associates of Marietta , who specializes in building security , said there are several components of security at U.S. embassies .
The contingent of U.S. Marine guards , which varies in number from embassy to embassy , is the most visible line of defense .
The State Department has its own security specialists that design , review and implement security for individual embassies .
The CIA provides security by monitoring local and regional threats .
`` The intelligence network plays a huge factor in determining what level of security is implemented , '' Brown said .
The embassies also usually have local police or military personnel as the first line of defense .
`` It should be seamless , but as with any organization , it 's not always seamless , '' Brown said .
Hardening security at foreign embassies can sometimes be difficult because of their location .
Some , like the embassy in Nairobi , are located in the center of downtown and cannot extend their protective perimeters because of streets and other businesses .
`` You cannot protect people against bombs of this size in a downtown area , '' said Vincent Farley , a retired top State Department official who has accompanied former President Jimmy Carter to East Africa .
The bomb that devastated that embassy reportedly exploded in a van parked just behind it .
The bomb in Tanzania reportedly was in the embassy parking lot .
After the Dhahran bombing two years ago , U.S. officials recommended extending the defensive perimeters of many at-risk overseas facilities .
`` But if you do n't control the perimeter , you 're very limited in what type of security you can have , '' Brown said .
Bob Finke , a senior security consultant for IPSA International of Atlanta , said the State Department will have to reevaluate its security procedures at all embassies , particularly how far the defensive perimeters should be extended .
But no matter how distant the perimeter , the attacks are likely to continue , Finke said .
`` I can envision this happening more and more as long as we remain the policeman of the world , '' Finke said .
`` Any site can be a target , '' said Farley , who now lives in Atlanta .
`` But a U.S. embassy is symbolic .
It is an attack on the U.S. government . ''
