WASHINGTON --
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Terrorist car bombs exploded outside US embassies in Nairboi , Kenya and Dar es Salaam , Tanzania just minutes apart Friday morning , ripping apart buildings , incinerating passengers in buses and flinging cars across crowded streets</ENAMEX> .
More than 80 people , including eight Americans , were killed in the two blasts , and more than 1,700 were injured .
Hospitals in both cities were overwhelmed treating people injured in the explosions , and pandemonium spread through bustling neighborhoods as parents tried to find lost children .
The death toll is expected to rise over the weekend as search teams look for missing people in both cities .
The scene in Nairobi , like the ruins of the Marine barracks in Beirut in 1983 , resembled a war zone .
An office building behind the embassy was destroyed , and the embassy itself was shattered .
Hospitals issued an urgent appeal for blood donations .
The tableau in Dar es Salaam was almost as appalling , with the embassy entrance in ruins .
Seven people were killed , including three Tanzanian guards .
Within hours , the US government sent a Foreign Emergency Support Team to Nairobi from Andrews Air Force Base , Va. , with FBI agents , communications specialists and anti-terrorism experts .
A C -141 cargo plane with surgeons and medical supplies also flew from Ramstein , Germany and a security team of Marines was dispatched to Nairobi , while another FBI investigation team was sent to Tanzania .
Also at the request of the United States , Israel sent a rescue team to Nairobi and the South African Air Force sent a Boeing 707 , equiped to handle up to 60 casualties .
No one in the region took immediate responsibility for the bombings -- the first time two embassies in different countries have been bombed simultaneously .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">But officials said that US intelligence agencies quickly narrowed the suspects to well-known radical Islamic groups and splinter organizations unknown even to most experts</ENAMEX> .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Among the suspect is Egypt 's outlawed Islamic Jihad , a radical terrorist group</ENAMEX> which earlier this week decried the help given by Washington to extradite Islamists to Cairo from Albania , and warned of retaliation .
State Department officials also took seriously a report that <ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">an Arabic speaker called the London offices of Egypt 's Al - Hayat newspaper and claimed that the bombings had been carried out by a group called The Army for the Liberation of Holy Places</ENAMEX> .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">There were also rumors that Nairobi police were seen taking an Arabic -speaking man into custody after the bombing</ENAMEX> .
President Clinton promised a strong response to the killings .
`` These acts of terrorist violence are abhorrent , they are inhuman , '' Clinton said .
`` We will use all the means at our disposal to bring those responsible to justice , no matter what or how long it takes . ''
The attacks , about 450 miles apart , clearly were the result of careful planning .
The car bomb in Nairobi was located in an alley in the rear of the embassy building in the center of the city .
The bomb in Dar Es Salaam is thought to have been located on a street in front of the embassy .
Experts said that the embassies in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam may have been chosen because both buildings are ` soft '' targets with security that would not meet today 's tougher State Department standards .
Also , both countries have porous borders .
`` It is clear there is no security failure , '' said Barry Rubin , senior resident scholar at Israel 's Bar Illan University .
`` The irony is that precisely because there was no security failure many were killed . ''
The explosions were especially chilling because they occurred in two countries where American business executives and tourists are generally well-received , and with whom the US government enjoys good relations .
`` It 's particularly surprising it would happen in Kenya and Tanzania because both are the most stable countries on the continent , '' said the Rev. Charles Stith of Boston , newly named US ambassador to Tanzania .
Stith was vacationing with his family in Saint Maarten , in the Caribbean , and will start his assignment in Tanzania next month .
The State Department had difficulty piecing together details of Friday 's blasts because communications centers at both embassies were completely destroyed , and security officers were busy rescuing colleagues .
A State Department official said that a car bomb rocked the embassy in a residential neighborhood of Dar es Salaam at 10 : 40 a.m. , local time .
Four or five minutes later , another huge explosion tore apart the embassy in the heart of Nairobi .
One official familiar with the region heard that the US embassy in Nairobi had been warned that a terrorist attack was possible .
But in an afternoon press conference Friday , Under Secretary of State Thomas Pickering said , `` We had no telephone ringing before it happened . ''
He added that the US receives 30,000 tips about terrorism every year .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">US officials and independent experts suggested a wide range of possible suspects , including extremists from Pakistan and terrorists sponsored by Iran or Iraq</ENAMEX> .
Some suggested that troubles in Congo or Sudan could have spilled over .
But at this point , no one knows who to blame .
In Africa , analysts point toward Sudan , an Islamic state whose relationship with the United States is openly hostile .
Washington accuses the Khartoum government of sponsoring terrorism and maintaining links with other rogue states such as Libya and Iran .
`` I would be very surprised if there was n't a link , '' said Jan van Eck , a senior analyst at the University of Cape Town , who specializes in conflict resolution in East Africa .
`` Nothing else can explain a chain of bombing attacks against the United States in that area . ''
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Another leading suspect is Osama Bin Laden</ENAMEX> , a Saudi Arabian dissident living in Afghanistan .
In June he told ABC News that American soldiers and civilians alike would be targets of attacks .
Investigators say Bin Laden is a likely suspect in a 1995 car bombing in Riyadh , Saudi Arabia , that killed five Americans and a June 1996 attack on a military housing complex near Dhahran , Saudi Arabia , that killed 19 American servicemen .
That 1996 attack on the Khobar Towers complex , which is still officially unsolved , haunts the Clinton administration .
An unsolved double bombing would encourage other terrorists , an official said .
`` Clearly it 's not going to happen overnight , but there 's a definite determination right now to make it a counter- Khobar Towers , for our own peace of mind , '' he said .
Anthony H. Cordesman , a Middle East security expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington , cautioned against too much uninformed speculation about the mastermind of the attacks .
`` Initial attempts to identify these groups have about a hundred-percent failure rate , '' he said .
For instance , pinning down the Libyan role in the bombing of a Pan Am plane over Scotland took nearly two years .
-LRB- Chris Black and Irene Sege of the Globe staff and correspondents Bonnie Rochman , Colum Lynch , and Kurt Shillinger contributed to this report .
Wire service material was used in its preparation . -RRB-
