WASHINGTON --
Law enforcement officials investigating the bombings at the American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania expressed optimism Sunday that a man brought back to the Kenyan capital over the weekend after being detained in Pakistan could help authorities unravel the plot behind the deadly terrorist attacks .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The suspect has been identified by government representatives in Pakistan and Kenya as Mohammed Sadik Howaida .
American officials said Sunday that they are increasingly certain he played a direct and possibly key role in the nearly simultaneous bombings on Aug. 7 that killed more than 250 people</ENAMEX> .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">In addition , the officials said that one or two other men are in custody in Pakistan who are also suspected of complicity in the bombings , possibly helping to arrange clandestine passage for Howaida and other confederates through Pakistan to the relative safety of neighboring Afghanistan</ENAMEX> .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The officials said they suspect Howaida of a significant role in part because he took the risk of remaining in Nairobi , Kenya , until the day of the bombing</ENAMEX> .
That suggested that his presence was necessary possibly because he was involved in building the bomb or in transporting it to the embassy .
It is unknown whether anyone saw him in Nairobi before the bomb exploded .
More broadly , the apprehension of Howaida raised the possibility of a quick breakthrough in the case and of a highly significant advance in the United States ' often lonely and frustrating effort to combat international terrorism against Americans .
A rapid end to the investigation would also send a powerful message to terrorists , in contrast to the long list of cases that have remained open for years without identifying the perpetrators -- like the 1996 bombing of the U.S. Air Force apartment complex in Saudi Arabia in which 19 Americans were killed .
But should Howaida be able to name collaborators who may be hiding in Afghanistan , the United States could face the problem of trying to apprehend suspects probably living under the protection of the Taliban , the radical Islamic group that controls most of the country .
On Sunday , <ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">officials would not elaborate on Howaida 's role , but Pakistani news reports said that he confessed to a role in the bombings when he was arrested after arriving in Karachi , Pakistan , from Nairobi on the day of the blasts</ENAMEX> .
He was initially detained when Pakistani immigration officials noticed that his face did not match his Yemeni passport and he attempted to bribe authorities to obtain his release .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">The officials said Howaida is suspected of being an associate or supporter of Osama bin Laden</ENAMEX> , the Saudi -born millionaire , who , from a stronghold in Afghanistan , has pledged a holy war on the United States .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">From the start , Bin Laden has been the object of intense scrutiny because of his strident anti- American statements and because of suspicions that he may have been involved in previous terrorist acts</ENAMEX> .
Even though law enforcement officials still have no direct evidence that Bin Laden was involved in the bombings , he has been at the center of an intense internal discussion at the FBI over whether the New York office should take jurisdiction of the bombing case away from the Washington field office , which has jurisdiction over crimes against Americans on the African continent .
FBI officials in New York have argued that they have investigated Bin Laden in connection with the World Trade Center bombing in 1993 , and therefore should take over the Kenya and Tanzania bombing investigations if he is found to be involved .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Reports that the Pakistani authorities had detained a suspect in the bombings came</ENAMEX> as American officials said that Pakistan wanted to keep a low profile , fearing a domestic backlash of the kind that followed disclosures that Pakistan had assisted in the 1995 arrest of Ramzi Ahmed Yousef , the mastermind of the World Trade Center bombing , and in the 1997 capture of Mir Amal Kansi , the man convicted of killing CIA employees outside the agency 's headquarters in 1993 .
As a result , Pakistani authorities were vague about how Howaida was returned to Nairobi .
A spokesman for the Pakistani government in Kenya said that the suspect had been turned over to the custody of Kenya , not the United States .
Meanwhile , Newsweek magazine , in its Monday issue , said that investigators in Nairobi found a 100-pound steel drive shaft imprinted with the vehicle identification number of the truck thought to have carried the bomb .
Authorities would not confirm this , but said that the discovery would be less significant than in other recent bombings , such as the World Trade Center bombing , when the identification number led authorities to rental agencies used by the bombers .
