GENEVA
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
The man accused of heading a Russian mafia organization had so much influence that he could get a hostage released in Chechnya `` with a few telephone calls , '' a Swiss court heard Tuesday .
A Swiss police inspector testified that when arrested two years ago at Geneva airport , Sergei Mikhailov , was carrying two passports from Russia , one from Israel and a diplomatic passport from Costa Rica .
Officers later found false papers from Greece and Portugal and a passport from Guyana , believed to have been bought for thousands of dollars .
He also lived in Austria and Belgium during the 1990s and had been banned from entering both France and the Czech Republic , said Police Inspector Patrick Scheurer .
Mikhailov , whose trial opened Monday , is accused of being a member of a criminal organization .
Prosecutors say he is the head of the Solntsevskaya mafia in Moscow , which has 1,700 members and the power to take over entire institutions in the city .
Mikhailov denies the charge , as well as one relating to the purchase of his villa which allegedly broke the Swiss laws on foreigners buying property .
The trial has seen unprecedented security measures , with the court ringed by police , sheets at the windows to stop people seeing in and bullet-proof vests for Mikhailov and some of the witnesses .
The court late Tuesday agreed that three witnesses believed to be particularly at risk could give evidence by video link from an adjacent room -- the first time this has happened in Geneva .
Former Russian police major Nikolai Oporov and two Russians under FBI protection will only be seen by the judge and jury so that no one else can recognize them .
After two failed attempts by the defense to stop the trial Monday , Scheurer took the stand as the first prosecution witness .
He said witnesses would tell how Mikhailov had arranged for the release of the brother of a business partner who was being held by a gang in the Russian break-away republic of Chechnya .
`` With a few phone calls he managed to rescue the brother , '' said Scheurer , adding this showed how much influence Mikhailov had with other criminal gangs .
Scheurer said in Mikhailov 's lavish villa near Geneva , police found illegal listening equipment , cash totaling 47,000 Swiss francs -LRB- dlrs 33,500 -RRB- and photographs of Mikhailov with other known criminals .
One showed him standing with the son of Vyacheslav Ivankov , the mafia godfather known as Yaponchik who is currently in prison in the United States .
Scheurer also described how police had become suspicious about how Mikhailov was conducting his affairs from inside his prison cell .
`` He never wanted to telephone , he did n't write , he received no visits except from his lawyers , '' he said .
One of Mikhailov 's lawyers was later arrested as he left the prison and was found to be carrying letters which had not been passed by the censor .
The trial is expected to last at least a fortnight .
Mikhailov , who has been in custody for more than two years , faces a maximum of seven-and-a-half years in prison .
-LRB- nk-cn -RRB- File Stored As : GVW0108 nkoppel 576 12-01 18 : 46 ri BC - Switzerland - Russia - Mafia Trial , 1
