MONTREAL
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
A reputed Hells Angel leader believed to be a key figure in North America 's bloodiest ongoing motorcycle gang war went on trial Tuesday , accused of ordering the killing of two prison guards .
The trial of Maurice `` Mom '' Boucher got under way before a sequestered 12-member jury -- the first time this decade the precaution has been ordered for a Montreal jury .
More than 60 people have been killed since 1994 in bombings and shootings linked to a power struggle between the Hells Angels and the rival Rock Machine gang for control of Quebec 's illegal drug trade .
Most of the victims have been gang members or hangers-on , but an 11-year -old boy was killed by a biker bomb three years ago , and last year two prison guards were shot dead , allegedly on Boucher 's orders .
Diane Lavigne , 42 , was shot by a passing motorcyclist as she drove home from work in June 1997 .
Pierre Rondeau , 49 , died in a hail of bullets from two gunmen three months later as he drove a prison bus .
The key prosecution witness is Stephane Gagne , a former Hells Angel sentenced to 25 years in prison after admitting to shooting Lavigne .
He is expected to testify that the burly , bespectacled Boucher ordered the killings to send a message to guards not to interfere with gang activities in prison .
Other former gang members also are scheduled to testify during the trial , which is expected to give the public an unusual inside view of the gang 's operations .
The jurors were selected Monday and Tuesday out of a pool of 250 candidates , more than half of whom asked to be excused .
One woman , whose initial request to be excused for health reasons was denied , burst into a screaming fit when another woman was excused to care for her pets .
The presiding judge , Jean - Guy Boilard , had announced earlier that the jurors would be sequestered in a hotel throughout the trial , expected to last four weeks , to shield them from outside influences and help protect their anonymity .
Rules for the jurors include no direct contact with their families , watching TV only in a group and reading newspapers purged of any reports on the trial .
Boilard ordered sequestration in part because of a court-commissioned survey of 2,000 prospective jurors last month , in which 82 percent of the respondents said they would be afraid to serve as jurors in the trial of an alleged organized crime leader .
During preliminary court appearances , the 45-year -old Boucher was kept in an enclosure of bulletproof glass , and virtually everyone entering the courtroom was searched .
While awaiting trial , Boucher stayed in a women 's prison , in an otherwise empty wing that underwent several hundred thousand dollars worth of security improvements , in order to keep him away from other gang members in men 's prisons .
Police say the Hells Angels have been active in Quebec for 20 years and have affiliates in every Canadian province except Ontario , Newfoundland and Prince Edward Island .
