NAPA , CALIF. --
Gunfire is not a sound commonly associated with the Napa Valley , California 's celebrated wine-making area tucked away in the hills north of San Francisco .
Or at least it was n't until an eruption of armed violence over the past two weeks , in which nine teenagers have been treated for gunshot wounds and the city of Napa has become America 's latest , and least likely , capital of crime .
After months of simmering tensions , rival gangs of Latino teenagers staged a bloody shoot-out in a run-down corner of the city at the beginning of last week .
Two days later , a gunman from one of the gangs sought revenge by opening fire with a 22-caliber automatic pistol on a line of high school students waiting for their morning bus .
Not only did he hit his intended target , the 14-year -old brother of one of the participants in the earlier fight , he also injured two other teenagers standing next to him .
The rest of the bus queue fled in terror .
This was not the first outbreak of armed violence in Napa -- there have been sporadic incidents for a few months -- but it marked a sharp escalation in the increasingly bitter feuds pitting disenfranchised Latino teenagers against each other in one of the most affluent corners of the United States .
Certainly , it was the first time that bystanders had got caught up in the violence .
And it has set Napa thinking that it might be on the verge of an all-out gang war .
`` A lot is in jeopardy here , because of the wineries and the tourist industry .
They are going to have to find a solution to this because if it runs out of control it will be a big , big problem , '' warned Gilbert Lopez , a former a gang member turned Pentecostal minister who works the streets up and down the valley .
City authorities have been extraordinarily cautious in their comments , clearly terrified of the impact that any further violence might have on the livelihood of the area .
The police insist Napa is still a safe place to visit , and the tourist office insists it has received no panic calls or booking cancellations .
But for leaders of the Latino community , which does almost all the menial work in the wine industry as well as the hotel and restaurant trades but receives little if any recognition , it is clear a crisis point has been reached .
`` People feel a great rage about what is going on , because they feel they are essentially in an apartheid situation , '' said Guillermo Brito , who runs a social services center called Nuestra Esperanza .
`` If the system keeps people down instead of helping them to empower themselves , it is a recipe for major conflict down the line . ''
The scourge of gang violence has hit Napa in much the same way that it has spread throughout California .
Turf wars in Los Angeles in the late 1970s and early 1980s led families to send children susceptible to gang influence out of town , thus contributing unwittingly to the dissemination of the phenomenon .
In state prisons , Mexicans then divided themselves into two clans , the Nortenos and the Surenos -- northerners and southerners .
Partly this was a matter of where they had settled in California , the city of Bakersfield being the rough dividing line .
Partly it was a matter of integration .
or third-generation Latinos formed friendships with white Americans , creating the Norteno gang together , and learned to look down on Sureno newcomers , whom they call `` scraps '' or `` corns . ''
In the Napa Valley , the two gangs do not fight so much over territory or criminal rackets -LRB- although there are drugs around , particularly methamphetamines known locally as `` crank `` -RRB- as over issues of identity .
The Nortenos wear red , the Surenos blue , and they clash all along the Napa River valley , from the city of Napa itself -- just off the main tourist trail -- to the pretty town of Calistoga , famous for its mud baths as well as its wine .
Mostly the violence has taken the form of beatings , clubbings or the occasional knife attack .
Six months ago , though , Napa experienced its first drive-by shooting , resulting in the death of a 17-year -old boy .
In Westwood , the Napa city neighborhood where the latest violence has occurred , the situation is particularly explosive because Nortenos and Surenos live on the same street blocks .
For many Latinos in the Napa Valley , the gang violence is a symptom of desperation experienced by young people with little to fill their time and little to look forward to except a sense of alienation from mainstream American society .
There are few role models for them to look up to other than the `` cool '' gang leaders on the street .
Only a tiny fraction of the valley 's schoolteachers and policemen speak Spanish , and fewer still show much cultural understanding of their situation .
The valley 's main economic and political interest groups have pressed for an end to the bad publicity before it damages the wine and tourist industries and they have urged the police to catch the culprits .
One of two guns used in the recent shootings has now been found , and an unnamed 17-year -old arrested .
Such limited actions do not address the broader issues at stake for the Latinos -- adequate wages , education and health care , primarily -- and do little to bridge the gap between the two communities .
Latinos already make up 80 percent of the valley 's population , and the proportion is growing .
More than a quarter of pupils registering at public schools are new arrivals fresh from Mexico .
`` California is in for a rude awakening , '' Brito said .
`` It depends on Mexicans for labor but offers them little or nothing in return .
The gangs are only one piece of a much larger problem . ''
___________________ -LRB- To publish this interesting 975-word article , it must be purchased from New York Times Syndicate sales representative NIRDI RELIS in New York at 1-800-972-3550 or 212-499-3333 , or fax her at 212-499-3382 . -RRB-
