AUSTIN --
For members of the Texas prison gang La Raza Unida , the typewritten words govern life and death .
Especially death .
`` When you are ordered to carry out a hit , you must do it . ''
`` There is no way out ... except by death . ''
Those two rules , among 30 that make up the group 's constitution , are much like ones in written dictums governing Texas ' other prison gangs and , authorities say , the growing web of murder and mayhem that those groups are spreading across Texas .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Soon , a Senate committee is scheduled to open a hearing in the Senate chambers into whether the activities of those gangs -- both inside and outside of prison -- have helped turn Texas ' corrections system into an incubator for racism and organized crime</ENAMEX> .
The hearing was scheduled before the recent racially motivated dragging death of a black man in Jasper , a crime which investigators say was committed by white ex-convicts who were suspected of racist-gang affiliations while they were in a Texas prison .
`` Drug trafficking , weapons smuggling , murder -- they 're into it all , '' said Sammy Buentello , chief expert on prison gangs for the Texas Department of Criminal Justice .
`` <ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">I do n't think there 's a large city in Texas that has n't experienced violence related to these prison groups</ENAMEX> .
It is a real and growing problem . ''
In fact , prison officials said , investigators believe two recent murders in Austin may have been ordered by one prison gang .
`` These new gangs have shown themselves to be extremely organized in comparison to their predecessors as well as being more ruthless , cold-hearted and loyal to their group , '' states a recent law enforcement memo highlighting the growing danger the gangs pose .
At present , Buentello said , there are seven organized gangs and several smaller groups inside Texas prisons with about 4,900 confirmed members -- less than 4 percent of Texas ' 142,000 convicts , but far more than the 400 which prison officials had identified 12 years ago .
Still more convicts claim membership in smaller groups or cliques , prison officials say .
Aides for state Sen. Royce West , the Dallas Democrat who chairs the committee , said it plans to scrutinize whether a state law may be helping spread the influence of prison gangs by requiring that convicts be paroled back to the county where they were convicted and whether anti-gang programs are hitting the mark .
All of the major gangs have written constitutions , officials said , ranging from a single page to three or four pages .
They establish rules for friendship , the leadership hierarchy and ways to settle disputes between members .
`` No fighting between carnales -LRB- members -RRB- .
Settle your conflict or -LRB- you -RRB- will have to settle it with knives and one of you must die , '' read the Raza Unida constitution , a copy of which was seized by authorities .
Most gangs maintain segregated memberships .
Buentello and other prison officials say that has been the case for 20 years , since gangs emerged in Texas prisons -- ironically , a byproduct of court-ordered changes in prison operations that desegregated housing and allowed convicts inside prisons to freely write to one another .
The desegregation triggered racial and ethnic tensions inside prisons and , as weaker convicts sought protection from predators , they formed groups -- almost always along racial or ethnic lines .
Black groups such as the Mandingo Warriors and Self Defense Family were at odds with the white Aryan Brotherhood and Texas Mafia , which warred with the Hispanic -membered Mexican Mafia and Texas Syndicate .
Trouble reached a peak in the mid-1980s , Buentello said , when a wave of gang-related violence in just one year left more than four dozen convicts murdered inside prisons -- and thousands of non-lethal attacks on other convicts and guards .
In the last six years , with the explosion of the prison population and arrival of young gang members , prison officials began isolating confirmed gang members in solitary confinement .
But letters to family and friends and a surreptitious network of communication inside prisons have allowed the gangs to continue expanding their influence and criminal activity , officials said .
