LOS ANGELES --
As guilty verdicts were read , over and over , in the racketeering prosecution two years ago of the prison gang known as la Eme , a pattern emerged : one defendant , Victor Murillo , was being acquitted of all counts against him .
His co-defendants cheered , and ultimately he was the only one of 13 men on trial to be set free .
But last month , Murillo 's name surfaced again in court papers , as federal prosecutors filed two new indictments against 27 suspected members of la Eme -LRB- so named for the Spanish pronunciation of the letter M -RRB- .
This time , however , Murillo is making his appearance as a murder victim .
The authorities here have turned their sights once again on la Eme , known as the Mexican Mafia , one of California 's oldest and still most powerful prison gangs , charging its members under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act with waging a brutal campaign for control of Southern California 's gangs and drug trade .
In the latest case , the defendants , said to have stepped in to fill the power vacuum created by the conviction of Murillo 's confederates , are charged in connection with four murders and 13 conspiracies to commit murder , and face other counts including attempted murder , assault and drug trafficking .
Eleven of the defendants in the new case were in state prison for previous convictions when the indictments were unsealed .
`` As with what we perceive to be significant criminal problems , we will address them until they are eliminated , '' said Alejandro Mayorkas , the U.S. attorney in Los Angeles .
`` Our first prosecutive effort directed toward the Mexican Mafia had a significant impact upon the organization .
It did not , however , eliminate the criminal conduct . ''
La Eme was conceived as a `` gang of gangs '' by inmates from East Los Angeles at the Deuel Vocational Institution south of Sacramento in the 1950s .
Membership is for life -- `` blood in , blood out '' the oath goes -- and the penalty for breaking rules is death .
Its membership is almost exclusively Mexican American , drawn from Southern California gang members who have been incarcerated .
As the cases make clear , those often in harm 's way from la Eme are the group 's own members .
Of 12 murders and attempted murders in the previous prosecution , five were of `` carnales , '' or brothers .
One suspected member , Mariano Martinez , 41 , is listed as a defendant in one of the new indictments , and as the target of a murder plot in the other .
While most details of Murillo 's death , and life , have remained closely held by the task force that has spent most of the decade investigating the Mexican Mafia , his story illustrates how one 's star rises and falls in the gang .
Murillo , 51 at the time of his trial , was said by investigators to have joined la Eme in the 1970s during a stay in federal prison for fraud , and to have done brisk business as a supplier of cocaine and speed .
He was charged with two racketeering conspiracy counts in the 1995 case , for being present at surreptitiously videotaped Mexican Mafia meetings where votes were taken on murder contracts and drug distribution .
On April 4 , 1998 , less than a year after his acquittal the previous May , Murillo was shot to death in a dirt parking lot outside Visalia , the small farming town where he lived in California 's Central Valley .
Speaking on condition of anonymity , officials have suggested a number of motives for his death , including his alliance with veteran members of the gang in the face of a generational rivalry and a refusal to share drug proceeds with younger members , or possibly retribution for a perception prompted by his acquittal that he had cooperated with law-enforcement authorities .
Charles Woody , 27 , a suspected Mexican Mafia member , is charged with Murillo 's death in the new case .
Woody has pleaded not guilty ; his lawyer , William S. Harris , declined to comment on the case .
In the early 1990s , la Eme sought to extend its influence beyond prison walls to the street , organizing street gangs in large public meetings to declare a ban on drive-by shootings and requiring gangs to pay `` taxes '' on drug profits .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The gangs mostly cooperated for fear of retribution by la Eme and to protect fellow street gang members in prison</ENAMEX> .
State corrections officials estimate la Eme 's ranks at up to 700 members , with thousands more on the street eager to do its bidding for a chance at membership .
Federal prosecutors first charged members of the gang in 1995 , hoping to break their power by sprinkling them through the larger federal prison system .
Although the gang 's tax collections continue , probation officers , police officers and one gang member say the prosecution has somewhat weakened la Eme and forced members to adopt a lower profile .
But as a result , they say , the old shooting truce that was once enforced by the Mexican Mafia is in tatters , and 24 people have been killed on the streets of East Los Angeles in the resulting gang war over the last six months .
`` The gang members sense that no one 's going to enforce violations of the code , '' said a probation officer who would only speak on the condition of anonymity .
`` Who 's going to issue sanctions ?
So there 's a lessening of control over the street gangs .
It 's kind of the yin and yang , you get some good and some bad with it .
But if you wait for organized crime to set the standards for our society , it 's pretty sorry indeed . ''
