AUSTIN , Texas --
Azikiwe Devaughn Daniels ' journey into gangs started like most others .
He joined at 13 , not because he wanted to be a criminal , but , as he explains it , `` because all my childhood friends were in the Crips .
I did n't want to be left out . ''
So after rejecting gang membership for a year , the lanky kid from Houston 's South Park neighborhood , a kid who had played Little League baseball and later would be a promising wide receiver on his high school football team , signed up .
`` It was a sense of belonging , '' says Daniels , now 23 .
`` It was like family . ''
His gang -- known as 52nd Street Hoover , a neighborhood group of Crips called a set -- soon became his identity .
`` I hung with them all the time , '' he said .
`` We got into it with other Crips .
There was fighting , drive-bys -LRB- shootings -RRB- , all that .
The bad side of it was not knowing what to expect next . ''
Traveling in that world of drug deals and street crime , Daniels said , he developed `` a thing for pistols , '' an attraction that would prove fatal to his freedom in 1992 , when he was convicted of murdering a street rival and sentenced to 26 years in prison .
The man he shot ?
`` Earl .
I ca n't remember his name .
He was an older dude , about 30 , '' Daniels said .
`` He was n't anything .
It all started out behind the drug trade .
He was shorting my money .
He was working with me. . . .
Then he shot up my house , and so I shot him . ''
In the Texas prison system , Daniels said , he faced a new world , a world where racial and ethnic tensions are a stark reality .
`` I see myself as more aggressive now .
I have more animosity , '' he said .
Some days , Daniels said , he vented that aggression toward other convicts whom he assaulted or toward prison guards when he refused work assignments .
He continued to wear his gang ID proudly , last year gaining a promotion to YG -- Young Gangster in the Crips ' hierarchy , a step above BG -LRB- baby gangster -RRB- , a soldier-level rank at which all members enter the gang .
He is now a step below the revered leadership title of OG -LRB- old gangster -RRB- .
In his new role , Daniels is a ranking Crip in the Estelle prison unit , where he is incarcerated .
Even so , he says , he eventually wants out of the gang life .
At home , he has a son , 7 , and a daughter , 6 , whom he does not want to join a gang -- `` not if I can help it . ''
When he eventually gets out of prison , Daniels said , he wants to go into the music business -- and stay out of trouble .
`` I would n't advise it to anyone , '' he says of gang life .
`` The love you 're looking for is not there ... .
This life is not what I 'm looking for . ''
Mike Ward writes for the Austin American - Statesman , Austin , Texas .
