Henry Granado Jr. , convicted Austin burglar , admitted member of the Texas Syndicate prison gang , could be the king of second chances .
Missed second chances .
Convicted nine years ago and sentenced to seven years in prison , Granado , 28 , got four chances at early freedom from state parole officials .
But in each case , he ended up back behind bars -- and involved with the notorious Texas Syndicate .
If Granado was involved with the Texas Syndicate as a result of one of his prison stays , as authorities suspect , parole officials said they never considered that before they released him each time .
Under new rules being drafted , that will change .
In the future , all convicts will be reviewed for possible gang ties before they are released from prison , said state Parole Director Veronica Ballard .
Members of prison gangs will be monitored more closely than other parolees in an attempt to keep them away from the gangs and keep them from returning to a life of crime .
`` This situation with Granado is a vestige of an old system that will not be a problem in the future , '' said Stennett Posey , a spokesman for the parole division of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice .
`` In the past , we thought of gangs as a -LRB- prison -RRB- problem .
Now , we realize it 's something we have to deal with in paroles and mandatory supervision . ''
Under mandatory supervision , prisoners must be released and placed under a parole officer 's supervision when their time served and good-behavior credits equal their sentence .
Under the proposed rules , prison officials will notify parole officials that they are preparing to release a gang member .
The convict will be prohibited from associating with other gang members after release .
He will be under `` super-intensive supervision , '' which can include wearing an electronic bracelet and allows parole officers to make daily -- rather than the standard monthly -- visits to the home and workplace .
Gang members who violate parole rules will face an immediate return to prison .
The convicts will be required to participate in programs designed to get them out of gangs and keep them out .
The tattoos on their arms and legs will be photographed so parole officials can document their gang-related markings after they leave prison .
Had the new procedures been in effect , officials say , Granado might never have been released so many times -- or , perhaps , gotten in so much more trouble .
According to state files , Granado was sentenced to seven years in prison in September 1989 for an Austin burglary .
Paroled in February 1990 , he was back behind bars a year later for violating parole rules and for `` association with persons with criminal background , '' said Posey , then a parole commissioner who approved Granado 's initial release .
Despite new charges against him , Granado was paroled again in June 1991 .
By that October , parole officials had issued a warrant for his arrest for failing to report to his parole officer .
The pattern continued , with three more releases and arrests from August 1994 until August , when police charged Granado and two other men with engaging in organized crime in connection with the November 1997 stabbing death of Anthony Reed , 24 , outside a Sixth Street club .
Parole Board Chairman Victor Rodriguez said the close supervision will include felons who come up for parole in the future , and the hundreds of gang members who already are on parole .
`` We 're going to make sure that all these people are supervised more intensively , '' Rodriguez said .
`` That should help us track them better once they are out .
It should help them by keeping them away from gangs once they are out .
`` And it should make the public safer . ''
