After a futile seven-day search of the East Texas woods for escaped death row inmate Martin Gurule , prison officials Thursday again began scrutinizing the fugitive 's possible gang connections for leads .
While prison spokesmen have denied the killer was affiliated with the Mexican Mafia , state prisons gang expert Sammy Buentello had warned wardens and others on Monday of Gurule 's possible gang affiliation .
In other developments , a $ 5,000 reward was posted by Crime Stoppers of Texas for information leading to Gurule 's capture and Gov. George W. Bush , recently returned from an overseas trip , expressed deep concern over the killer 's escape .
Texas Department of Criminal Justice spokesman Larry Fitzgerald confirmed Thursday that Gurule has `` suspected but not confirmed '' ties to the gang .
Another spokesman , Larry Todd , added that officers now are attempting to question `` real or perceived members of the gang in the ` free world . '
'' If Gurule is a Mexican Mafia member , it is possible members who have been released from prison could support him in his flight from police .
The Corpus Christi convict has no gang tattoos , but authorities said that does n't necessarily mean he is not a gang member .
The focus on gang affiliation may be an indication that authorities quietly are backing away from their often-stated assertion that Gurule most likely remains in the 17,000 heavily wooded acres that adjoin the state 's death row prison .
`` With every passing day , '' Fitzgerald said , `` we are readjusting our thinking . ''
While dog searches and flyovers by heat-sensing equipped helicopters continue , authorities are faced with the fact that so far , all their efforts had been futile .
As Fitzgerald prepared to abandon the state 's de-facto press center , a log cabin on the Ellis Unit campus downwind from the prison pig farm , he expressed optimism that a planned Saturday TV broadcast of the escape 's re-enactment on `` America 's Most Wanted '' would shake loose new leads .
`` We hope to get a lot more eyes , '' he said .
`` The more people aware of the situation , the better off we are . ''
Texas Gov. George W. Bush expressed concern over Gurule 's escape .
`` Why a death row inmate escaped and still is at large ...
Yes , this concerns me a lot , '' he said .
Asked if he thought the escapee had outside help , the governor responded : `` That 's what I want to know and that 's what Texans want to know . ''
Criminal Justice Board Chairman Allan Polunsky this week announced formation of a fact-finding commission to determine answers to that and other questions concerning the escape .
Gurule , 29 , convicted of killing two men during a 1992 Corpus Christi robbery , was the only one of seven condemned killers to succeed in breaking out of death row before dawn last Friday .
The captured inmates have been placed in administrative segregation , a high-security setting in which they are allowed to leave their cells for only an hour a day .
Todd , responding to claims made Wednesday in Houston by death row opponents , said the inmates had not been denied visits from their lawyers .
`` We are not denying anyone their rights , '' Todd said .
`` As far as I know , there have not been any requests from lawyers to see them . ''
Additionally , he said , if independent physicians want to examine the inmates , they must contact TDCJ institutional director Gary Johnson for permission .
Todd said the inmates were found to be in good physical condition by prison medical personnel .
Houston physician Dan Wirt , who spoke at a Texas Coalition to Abolish the Death Penalty rally , charged that prison officials were brutalizing the captured would-be escapees .
Todd said the men were being questioned , but denied that they were being abused .
XXXXEND OF STORY
