TENNESSEE COLONY , Texas --
Deep inside the Coffield prison , from a tiny cage in a hallway , a young convict screams obscenities at everyone .
And no one .
Down an adjacent corridor , an `` extraction team '' of guards in riot helmets , padded vests and gas masks marches in lock step to a cell where a convict has grabbed a mop from a trusty and is threatening to hurt somebody .
They spray him with tear gas and haul him off in handcuffs .
Across the way , a guard walks briskly , a plastic shield in front of him at every step to avoid being splattered with urine and feces that some convicts are throwing through their cell bars .
`` Welcome to animal house , '' says an unsmiling guard .
Several corridors away , an identical cellblock holds hundreds of other convicts whom prison officials deem just as dangerous .
But here , where the Barrio Azteca prison gang lives , the stillness is broken only by bouncing basketballs in a recreation yard and the `` Jerry Springer Show '' blaring on a television .
`` We know how to do time , '' explains a gang member .
`` We have respect for each other .
We enforce it . ''
At a time when the gangs are being blamed for increasing violence in and out of prison , the reality in the maximum-security lockups where gang members are segregated is orderly , almost serene .
The eerie calm highlights the central role gangs have come to occupy in some Texas prisons .
Even though gang activities are banned , membership has more than quadrupled during the 1990s .
Even though prison officials ' goal is to break up the gangs , they house their members together because they 're easier to manage that way .
And even though prison officials say they try to prevent gang activities , they have in some instances enlisted gang leaders in efforts to maintain order .
The Coffield Unit , about 60 miles southwest of Tyler , Texas , holds about 1,000 of 5,000 confirmed gang members in Texas prisons , more than any other unit .
Entire cellblocks are filled with members of Barrio Azteca , Mexican Mafia , Hermanos Pistoleros Latinos , Raza Unida , Texas Mafia and Texas Syndicate .
One convict to a cell .
All mail is closely monitored .
No one leaves his cell without handcuffs and constant escort , and only then for up to two hours , for a shower or for recreation with other gang members .
Even so , there are increasing questions about whether the strict rules are effective , about whether prison officials are doing enough .
`` In some cases , I think guards are encouraging and allowing gang activity to happen , '' said Linda Reeves , with Texas Inmate Family Association , an advocacy group .
`` And that 's not right . ''
Wayne Scott , executive director of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice , disagrees .
`` Are we in charge ?
Absolutely .
Are these gangs calling the shots ?
Absolutely not , '' he said .
`` By keeping these gangs in a very controlled environment , we watch everything they do ... .
They play by our rules . ''
On B Wing , where the Barrio Azteca members live , convicts say the rules that count are those of the gang .
Amid growing concern by police about the spreading influence of prison gangs inside and outside prison , some legislative leaders suggest that the segregation of gang members , in solitary confinement with their colleagues , may not be the wisest choice .
`` If we cage them in administrative segregation , label them gang members and never deal with them , never offer them any programs to change their attitude or life , which is what we seem to be doing now .
We 're probably going to see worse criminals when they come out , '' said state Sen. John Whitmire , chairman of the Senate Criminal Justice Committee .
Prison officials defend the system as practical and proven , one that avoids the bloody trouble that might come from mixing gang members , even in small groups , even in solitary cells , next to each other .
`` They earn this level of incarceration by their behavior , '' Scott said .
`` Gangs or not , we have one of the safest prison systems in the country . ''
Rules of the gangs Although the guards enforce one set of rules , the gangs have a code that exists alongside it .
Yelling or speaking disrespectfully to fellow gang members will result in a warning , sometimes delivered orally , sometimes in a written message delivered by `` fishing lines , '' string and long poles fashioned out of rolled-up newspaper with a hook on the end to pass communiques from cell to cell , even between floors .
For those who do n't heed the warning , a beating may be in store , administered on a recreation court or day room by the small groups of gang members who are allowed out at the same time for recreation , the only group activity permitted .
`` Internal discipline '' is the way Warden Keith Price and other prison officials sometimes describe it .
Occasionally , just as on the street , a gang member will break the wrong rule , and a top member of the gang can order him killed .
At least three such death orders have been carried out this year in Texas prisons , authorities said .
Most recent : a July 3 stabbing at the Allred prison outside Wichita Falls , where investigators suspect a Mexican Mafia member was ordered killed .
In June and July , gang members were responsible for 94 major incidents in prison , ranging from assaults to weapon possession to disobeying guards .
Most were members of one gang attacking members of another .
With the growing gang numbers in prison has come growing problems .
Low parole rates and less time off for good behavior have stripped away incentives to behave .
More prisoners are serving more time for more violent crimes .
These conditions make prison a fertile place for gangs , said Gary Johnson , director of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice 's prison division .
And for trouble .
Increasingly , officials say , pepper spray , tear gas grenades and physical force are being required to quell disturbances .
In recent months , more than two dozen prisons have experienced gang problems .
On July 19 , guards used tear gas to subdue a fight between black and Hispanic convicts in a dorm at the Segovia prison in South Texas , but not before six combatants broke down a wall into an adjacent dorm , according to a prison report .
More common : a Sept. 9 stabbing at the Beto I Unit near Tennessee Colony , one of 12 reported at the prison in a few weeks involving members of the Puro Raza Mexicales gang and the rival Tango Mexicales .
Despite the violence , gang membership can offer protection from predators , even a sense of family , experts say .
Or it can mean a ticket to a unit with other members of their gang , such as Coffield B Wing , where the Barrio Azteca members live in relative peace .
Increased violence in prisons endangers not only gang members but also guards and prisoners who are trying to straighten out their lives , officials say .
And taxpayers bear the cost of increased security inside prisons .
And one day , most convicts will emerge from prison , back onto the streets , back into communities .
`` Twenty years ago , a robber might have taken pride in never using a gun .
Now , they 'll shoot someone first and then rob them , '' said Sam Buentello , the prison system 's top gang expert .
Hatred and bonding In the prison culture of barely suppressed anger , of predatory behavior and rape , a place of enforced uniformity and harsh routine , there is hate .
And prejudice .
In this place where 45 percent of convicts are black , 29 percent are white and 26 percent are Hispanic , where 61 percent of the employees are white , 23 percent are black and 15 percent are Hispanic , race is a denominator for everyday life , especially in the tougher maximum-security units .
In this environment , the same white uniforms , the same buzz-cut hair , guards barking orders and convicts answering with epithets , strip searches every time they come and go between their cells and work , convicts seize on race and ethnicity as a bond .
Or a reason to hate .
Such hatred can breed violence that is furious and unthinkable , like the June attack in Jasper that made national headlines , when three white ex-convicts chained a man behind a pickup truck and dragged him to death , just because he was black .
Patrick Petrick , a convicted Houston robber , knows well that mentality of hate .
Until 1993 , he was a general for the Aryan Brotherhood of Texas prison gang , a top leader who helped draft the gang 's constitution , someone other members once feared .
Now that he has renounced his membership , after refusing an order to kill someone , they want to kill him .
`` I heard it all ... .
I lived the rhetoric , '' he said from behind the plastic window on an interview booth at the Goree Unit in Huntsville , where he is in protective custody .
`` But I did n't kill anybody . ''
Prison officials say his path into the gang , and into the mentality of hate , is typical .
First arrested at age 13 , a `` ball of hate looking for a place to turn , '' Petrick said , he affiliated with the Aryan Brotherhood in 1985 , while he was in the Harris County Jail , and joined four years later .
Having done prison time previously in California and Minnesota , with a reputation for winning jailhouse fights , Petrick probably seemed the perfect recruit .
`` I was extremely racist , '' he said , explaining that his views grew from a troubled childhood in which `` I started hating and focusing that hate ... .
I felt I had a good reason to hate society . ''
In prison , he said , race became just another reason to hate .
Race , Petrick said , is `` all you have left in here .
We 're stripped down .
The only identity we have in prison is our skin color . ''
To combat the racial and ethnic tensions , to try to adjust convicts ' attitudes before the inmates leave prison , officials offer several anger-management and diversity lessons in prison classrooms .
But they are available only at the lower-security units , generally not those where gang members and the tougher convicts are locked up , and officials privately concede that their effectiveness is limited if convicts have no desire to stop hating .
`` If someone wants to hate , they will hate , '' prison director Scott said , noting that racial tensions tend to drop as the security level of the prison decreases .
`` People do n't come to prison for being good citizens .
They come for breaking society 's rules . ''
State Sen. Royce West , D - Dallas , a former prosecutor who chairs a legislative committee studying prison gangs , agrees .
But , like other lawmakers and criminal justice academics , he questions `` whether race is actually the problem or whether it is really other issues . ''
`` We get this uncut , raw , X -rated view of racism in the prison system , '' he said .
`` But I think prison gangs are using racism as a crutch to attract other individuals to join them , and we need to address that . ''
By most accounts , racism figured heavily in the formation of prison gangs in Texas two decades ago .
Until the late 1970s , Texas prisons were segregated by race and run by convicts known as `` building tenders , '' trusted prisoners whom guards allowed to supervise dorms and cellblocks .
Then federal court orders desegregated prisons and outlawed the building tender system .
Hispanics , whites and blacks were forced to live with one another .
Racial and ethnic tensions flared .
And for protection against assaults and thefts , convicts formed gangs , mostly along racial and ethnic lines .
The Texas Syndicate , formed years earlier in California prisons by Texans seeking to protect themselves , was first .
Then came groups with names such as Mexican Mafia , Texas Mafia , Mandingo Warriors , Self Defense Family and the Aryan Brotherhood .
By 1985 , Texas ' seven prison gangs were big trouble .
Of the 52 convict slayings in 1984-85 , 48 were gang-related , prison officials said .
`` There were 1,500 assaults on staff in 1985 , '' said Buentello .
`` All hell had broken loose . ''
Zero tolerance To regain control , prison officials adopted a zero-tolerance policy that remains in effect today .
If you are confirmed as a gang member , you serve your sentence on lockdown , alone in a solitary cell , with only an hour outside each day for exercise .
Despite that , by the early 1990s , gangs started to grow again , fed by an influx of young criminals who had grown up in street gangs .
In just a few years , the number of confirmed gang members inside Texas prisons jumped from 1,280 to more than 5,000 .
Barrio Azteca , Raza Unida and Hermanos Pistoleros Latinos were added to the gang list .
But dozens more smaller groups of convicts , less-organized but ganglike in mentality nonetheless , began to spring up , sporting names like the Kingwood Chongos , Tango Mexicales , Aggieland Crypt and Bud Club .
In all , officials estimate that as many as 10,000 convicts may be affiliated with some gang or group of some sort inside Texas prisons .
But in a prison system with only 8,200 solitary-confinement cells , of which gang members now occupy well over half , there is simply no room to isolate them all .
But that could soon change .
Prison officials have announced plans to build a new generation of solitary-confinement units at a cost of more than $ 100 million to hold the growing number of violent convicts and die-hard gang members .
With that will come another whopping price tag : $ 53 a day to house a convict in the high-security unit compared with $ 38 a day for a regular prison .
A year ago , the first of those units , the Estelle High - Security Unit outside Huntsville , was opened .
At Super Max , as the unit is known , the cells have no bars or windows to the outside , only a steel door with two narrow windows and a slot to pass food trays through .
More than half of the 660 convicts in the Super Max unit are gang members , people like Juan Garza , serving 20 years for auto burglary in Houston .
Garza , 31 , is among a growing chorus of people who complain that Super Max is too much -- too much isolation , too few programs , too punitive an environment where convicts may only grow meaner .
`` Sitting in this cell 23 hours a day does n't better anyone , '' said Garza , a ninth-grade dropout whom prison officials identify as a member of the Mexican Mafia .
`` People go crazy here ... .
There are guys that actually sit in front of a mirror and carry on an entire conversation . ''
To break the solitude , gang members communicate by `` the phone , '' the air vents through which they can talk to each other .
Much to the chagrin of guards , they also have learned how to `` fish , '' pass written messages between cells with string passed through a small crack beneath the steel cell doors .
They play chess by making hand signs through the small plastic window in their cell doors .
And during their one hour of recreation a day , singly in small chain-link pens where guards are near with clipboards to record any gang-related conversations , Garza said they can talk .
But will such tough treatment force convicts to change for the better ?
And will it stop or thwart gang activity ?
Yes , say prison officials , who insist that assaults and misbehavior have dropped markedly at Super Max .
Convicts disagree .
`` It 's just like tying up a dog , chaining him up ... and expecting him to come back five years later , 10 years later when you have n't fed him right , you 've mistreated him , and you go and let him loose , '' Garza said .
`` What is he going to do ?
Eventually , he 's going to go and bite somebody .
And then we end up chaining him right back up . ''
Despite the complaints and the high cost , prison officials insist the new isolation beds are humane , and needed .
`` Those beds will be filled as soon as we can get them open , '' said Allan Polunsky , a San Antonio lawyer who heads the prison system 's governing board .
`` And the sooner the better . ''
In youth prisons At the Texas Youth Commission , Executive Director Steve Robinson estimates that gang activity has jumped by 25 percent in the past year .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Last spring , in the first such uprising , teen-age delinquents rioted at the Evins Regional Juvenile Center in Edinburg and took control of a dorm for several hours .
After 25 youth commission staff members and 16 sheriff 's deputies regained control , they found graffiti for a Hispanic street gang -- one affiliated with a prison gang -- amid the debris </ENAMEX>.
A few days later , delinquents tried the same thing at another state school .
And in May , officials thwarted plans for a similar riot at the Crockett State School in East Texas .
Twelve gang leaders were locked up in solitary cells , Robinson said .
For a corrections system where rehabilitation programs are the priority , not steel-and-concrete punishment , the trend is ominous .
`` It 's a toxic mix , '' Robinson said , noting that 40 percent of youth commission delinquents admit an affiliation with a street gang .
`` Gangs threaten the whole of what we do , because gang influences interfere with the programs that are a key to what we do .
That 's where we start to lose ground in rehabilitation . ''
While Robinson said no youth commission delinquents have been found to be members of prison gangs , officials in recent months have intercepted letters from adult convicts recruiting teen-age offenders to join white-supremacist prison gangs .
As a result , correspondence from convicts is now are prohibited at youth commission lockups .
And youth commission officials are making plans to build hundreds of single-cell lockups rather than traditional dorm-style housing , where gang activity can be hard to control .
About 40 percent of the agency 's 3,000 beds are single-bunk .
The goal is to `` make gang behavior a lot more costly , '' Robinson said .
Inmate ingenuity In the adult prisons , such a policy has been longstanding .
And while prison officials say it has curbed most violence , and probably thwarted gang recruitment efforts inside prison , the gangs ' illicit ingenuity continues .
Though prison rules prohibit tattooing , convicts still practice it , using electronic parts from a vending machine or a fan , a needle or razor blade , and a dye made from burned soap or ink .
Prison officials say tattooing is less prevalent now than in the past , a result of gang members seeking to avoid the punishment for detection : solitary confinement .
At the Coffield Unit , guards recently discovered that a gang member had used a smuggled hacksaw blade to cut the bottom track off his cell door so he could slip out to attack a rival .
At the Estelle High - Security Unit , a gang member used scouring powder on a shoelace to do the same thing .
`` They spend all day , every day trying to come up with ways to beat us , '' said Michael Upshaw , warden of the Coffield cellblocks that house gang members .
`` And we work just as hard to keep them from doing that . ''
Four years ago , the white-supremacist Texas Aryan Brotherhood tried to turn itself into a religious group -- the Church of Aryan Christian Heritage Inc. -- as a way to force prison officials to let members meet and correspond unimpeded .
About the same time , the Fraternal Order of the Aryan Brotherhood was incorporated to promote an Aryan , Christian culture .
Its corporate address : the Terrell prison unit near Livingston , in East Texas .
Even in prison , the gangs maintain a hierarchy .
Rudy Cantu , listed by prison officials as a general in the Mexican Mafia , occupies a cell at the Coffield Unit .
But rather than talk with visitors , sometimes even guards , he speaks through a spokesman -- another convict on his cellblock .
`` This is the reality , '' he tells a reporter , rattling his cell door .
`` That is all I got to say . ''
He directs a reporter up one floor to another convict who , he says in Spanish , is his `` official spokesman . ''
That convict declines to talk .
The gangs have leaders who make major decisions for members at one or several prisons .
Some are called `` general , '' some `` president . ''
In some gangs , such as the Barrio Azteca at Coffield , rank can be denoted by the number of `` plumas , '' Spanish for feathers .
Joe Saldivar , a member of the Mexican Mafia incarcerated at the Estelle High - Security Unit , explains the hierarchy .
`` We might put somebody on restriction where we wo n't let him go out for rec .
But we try to do it as democratically as we can .
We pass around an envelope with different opinions on it .
Everybody has a chance to speak their piece ... .
We try to do it like they do it in a court of law . ''
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">While convicts deny it , prison officials say they also use the messaging system to order violent crimes outside prison , including murder</ENAMEX> .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">A federal indictment unsealed July 20 in San Antonio alleges that eight members of the Mexican Mafia carried out 14 murders in Texas between 1994 and 1997 , including one in a state prison in Brazoria County , in a conspiracy hatched inside and outside of prisons</ENAMEX> .
Such allegations can add to a gang 's clout inside the violent prison .
`` The members of these gangs do what they are told to do , '' Warden Price says .
`` If one of their leaders tells them to shut up , they shut up , because if they do n't , they know there 's consequences -- harsh consequences . ''
And that , he says , explains why the Barrio Azteca cellblock in B Wing `` is probably one of the cleanest ... one of the quietest cellblocks on the entire unit .
It 's all gangsters . ''
