MOSCOW --
In the old days , Russians traveling abroad were often -- and often rightly -- suspected of being KGB agents .
Now they are more likely to be suspected of belonging to something called the Russian mafia -- a nebulous term that has taken on real meaning in Budapest , Geneva , Brooklyn , Los Angeles and anywhere else where Russia 's brazen criminal class has managed to set up branch offices .
But the term `` mafia '' -- an Italian word -- is something of a misnomer in Russia 's freewheeling criminal world .
That is one of the reasons why Sergei Mikhailov was recently set free by a court in Geneva after being exonerated , in a 10-day trial , of charges that he is the boss of the largest and most powerful gang in Russia today .
According to news accounts , the mountain of evidence presented against Mikhailov , 40 , did little more than prove that he is , as he put it , `` very , very rich , '' and that he has on occasion hung out with some very unpleasant people connected to Russian gang activity .
If he were an Italian being tried in Italy , he might well have been found guilty under a 1982 law that makes `` mafia association '' a criminal offense .
With laws like these , Italy 's war against organized crime has scored major victories in the last decade .
But for such a law to work against a Russian -LRB- assuming that it would ever be enforced -RRB- , the first task would be to define the word `` mafia . ''
While in Italy the word signifies discreet criminal organizations with strict hierarchical structures , in Russia it has come to mean much more .
In Russia , it embraces the noxious blend of crime , politics and business that has engulfed Russia since the lifting of Communist controls .
`` The problem is in the definition , '' said Pino Arlacchi , an expert on the Italian mafia and a former Italian senator who heads the United Nations ' Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention .
`` When you go to court , you have to be able to define what the mafia is .
In Italy , we discovered that there was a formal structure , with a very precise division of roles , and formal system for joining .
In Russia , you do n't have that . ''
In Italy , purists argue that the word `` mafia '' applies only to the Cosa Nostra , the tightly run Sicilian organization that has traditionally been the country 's most powerful and brutal criminal group .
In the 1980s , when hundreds of Sicilian mafiosi were put on trial and convicted , the Cosa Nostra 's dominant Corleone clan lashed out with a campaign of terror that culminated in the assassination in 1992 of Giovanni Falcone , Sicily 's top prosecutor .
Today all but one of the top leaders of the Cosa Nostra -- members of its `` cupola '' or board of directors -- are in prison .
Of Italy 's other regional crime groups , the Camorra in Naples is the most anarchic , a loose band of gangs whose penetration into local society has been more difficult to root out .
According to Arlaachi , Russian organized crime is closer in kind to the Neapolitan version , although even in Naples , he conceded , the Neapolitans abide by rules that the Russians routinely ignore .
In Arlaachi 's view , only 10 percent to 20 percent of Russian crime can be attributed to organized crime , in the mafia sense of the word .
`` Most of these groups have proliferated very quickly , taking advantage of the weakening of the state , '' he said .
`` They are not concerned about a high level of organization .
They are too busy exploiting the opportunities they have in front of them .
They use violence in ways that to a Sicilian mafioso would be inconceivable . ''
According to Russians and foreigners who do business here , the collusion between criminals and bureaucrats , between gunrunners and bankers , between policemen and thieves is so widespread and runs so deep that untangling the links is now virtually impossible , not to mention dangerous .
The intermingling of legal and illegal business dates back to the late 1980s , when cooperatives were first allowed to creep through the cracks in the state-controlled economy , before a legal framework was ready to promote and protect private enterprise .
Rackets soon sprang up in the cooperatives ' shadow , offering both protection and a method of settling disputes .
As business became more sophisticated , criminal gangs followed suit .
By the early 1990s , small businesses whose bank accounts had grown to critical levels were likely to get a visit by men who , tipped off by their agents inside the banking system , would offer their protective services in return for a share of profit , or alternatively a loan on terms that were hard to refuse .
By its very essence , the Russian version of the mafia defies the Italian definition of a secret society , which until recently protected itself by a wall of silence .
In Russia , there is no oath of silence , or `` omerta , '' as the Sicilians call it .
Instead , crime groups have an open-door policy that over the last 10 years has been wide enough to let in a large swath of society , willingly and unwillingly , from policemen to bankers , from politicians to industrialists .
The Russian criminal world has come a long way from the now-legendary days of the `` thieves in law , '' a peculiar term given to criminals who during their long stints in Soviet prisons were crowned by their peers as the ultimate arbiters of criminal disputes .
Such men still exist but their authority has been undermined by a de facto legitimization of crime that started with run-of-the-mill racketeering , gambling and prostitution , and gradually climbed up through the ranks of government .
Take the case of Mikhailov , who 15 years ago was a waiter at a Moscow hotel .
Sent to prison in 1984 for insurance fraud -LRB- he stole his own motorcycle -RRB- , he made the contacts that , according to police and press reports , were to lay the groundwork for the rest of his career .
After prison , he set up a local sports organization and was allowed to travel abroad in 1986 , despite Soviet -era controls barring most Russians from leaving the country .
He was arrested twice again -- once for racketeering , another time for the murder of a casino owner -- but was not convicted .
At the time of his arrest in Switzerland in 1996 , Mikhailov was an international operator with an empire that was said to include a hotel in Budapest , a banana-exporting business in Costa Rica and interests in Israel , Belgium and across the former Soviet Union .
Witnesses at the trial testified that his arrest broke up negotiations on two contracts totaling $ 350 million , one involving the laying of a new sewage system in Moscow , the other the construction of a gas pipeline from Turkmenistan .
So how did a former waiter become a multi-billionaire , with a home in Switzerland , a Costa Rican diplomatic passport , and the kind of insider political contacts that can make or break a business in Russia ?
On his arrival in Moscow before a bank of television cameras , Mikhailov had an answer .
Flashing a V -for-victory sign , he told reporters that his exoneration by the Swiss was proof not only that `` Russians are not necessarily criminals , '' but that `` they can be businessmen who contribute to the development of the economy of Russia . ''
