-LRB- 2 -RRB- Zero tolerance To regain control , prison officials adopted a zero-tolerance policy that remains in effect today .
If you are confirmed as a gang member , you serve your sentence on lockdown , alone in a solitary cell , with only an hour outside each day for exercise .
Despite that , by the early 1990s , gangs started to grow again , fed by an influx of young criminals who had grown up in street gangs .
In just a few years , the number of confirmed gang members inside Texas prisons jumped from 1,280 to more than 5,000 .
Barrio Azteca , Raza Unida and Hermanos Pistoleros Latinos were added to the gang list .
But dozens more smaller groups of convicts , less-organized but ganglike in mentality nonetheless , began to spring up , sporting names like the Kingwood Chongos , Tango Mexicales , Aggieland Crypt and Bud Club .
In all , officials estimate that as many as 10,000 convicts may be affiliated with some gang or group of some sort inside Texas prisons .
But in a prison system with only 8,200 solitary-confinement cells , of which gang members now occupy well over half , there is simply no room to isolate them all .
But that could soon change .
Prison officials have announced plans to build a new generation of solitary-confinement units at a cost of more than $ 100 million to hold the growing number of violent convicts and die-hard gang members .
With that will come another whopping price tag : $ 53 a day to house a convict in the high-security unit compared with $ 38 a day for a regular prison .
A year ago , the first of those units , the Estelle High - Security Unit outside Huntsville , was opened .
At Super Max , as the unit is known , the cells have no bars or windows to the outside , only a steel door with two narrow windows and a slot to pass food trays through .
More than half of the 660 convicts in the Super Max unit are gang members , people like Juan Garza , serving 20 years for auto burglary in Houston .
Garza , 31 , is among a growing chorus of people who complain that Super Max is too much -- too much isolation , too few programs , too punitive an environment where convicts may only grow meaner .
`` Sitting in this cell 23 hours a day does n't better anyone , '' said Garza , a ninth-grade dropout whom prison officials identify as a member of the Mexican Mafia .
`` People go crazy here ... .
There are guys that actually sit in front of a mirror and carry on an entire conversation . ''
To break the solitude , gang members communicate by `` the phone , '' the air vents through which they can talk to each other .
Much to the chagrin of guards , they also have learned how to `` fish , '' pass written messages between cells with string passed through a small crack beneath the steel cell doors .
They play chess by making hand signs through the small plastic window in their cell doors .
And during their one hour of recreation a day , singly in small chain-link pens where guards are near with clipboards to record any gang-related conversations , Garza said they can talk .
But will such tough treatment force convicts to change for the better ?
And will it stop or thwart gang activity ?
Yes , say prison officials , who insist that assaults and misbehavior have dropped markedly at Super Max .
Convicts disagree .
`` It 's just like tying up a dog , chaining him up ... and expecting him to come back five years later , 10 years later when you have n't fed him right , you 've mistreated him , and you go and let him loose , '' Garza said .
`` What is he going to do ?
Eventually , he 's going to go and bite somebody .
And then we end up chaining him right back up . ''
Despite the complaints and the high cost , prison officials insist the new isolation beds are humane , and needed .
`` Those beds will be filled as soon as we can get them open , '' said Allan Polunsky , a San Antonio lawyer who heads the prison system 's governing board .
`` And the sooner the better . ''
In youth prisons At the Texas Youth Commission , Executive Director Steve Robinson estimates that gang activity has jumped by 25 percent in the past year .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Last spring , in the first such uprising , teen-age delinquents rioted at the Evins Regional Juvenile Center in Edinburg and took control of a dorm for several hours .
After 25 youth commission staff members and 16 sheriff 's deputies regained control , they found graffiti for a Hispanic street gang -- one affiliated with a prison gang -- amid the debris</ENAMEX> .
A few days later , delinquents tried the same thing at another state school .
And in May , officials thwarted plans for a similar riot at the Crockett State School in East Texas .
Twelve gang leaders were locked up in solitary cells , Robinson said .
For a corrections system where rehabilitation programs are the priority , not steel-and-concrete punishment , the trend is ominous .
`` It 's a toxic mix , '' Robinson said , noting that 40 percent of youth commission delinquents admit an affiliation with a street gang .
`` Gangs threaten the whole of what we do , because gang influences interfere with the programs that are a key to what we do .
That 's where we start to lose ground in rehabilitation . ''
While Robinson said no youth commission delinquents have been found to be members of prison gangs , officials in recent months have intercepted letters from adult convicts recruiting teen-age offenders to join white-supremacist prison gangs .
As a result , correspondence from convicts is now are prohibited at youth commission lockups .
And youth commission officials are making plans to build hundreds of single-cell lockups rather than traditional dorm-style housing , where gang activity can be hard to control .
About 40 percent of the agency 's 3,000 beds are single-bunk .
The goal is to `` make gang behavior a lot more costly , '' Robinson said .
Inmate ingenuity In the adult prisons , such a policy has been longstanding .
And while prison officials say it has curbed most violence , and probably thwarted gang recruitment efforts inside prison , the gangs ' illicit ingenuity continues .
Though prison rules prohibit tattooing , convicts still practice it , using electronic parts from a vending machine or a fan , a needle or razor blade , and a dye made from burned soap or ink .
Prison officials say tattooing is less prevalent now than in the past , a result of gang members seeking to avoid the punishment for detection : solitary confinement .
At the Coffield Unit , guards recently discovered that a gang member had used a smuggled hacksaw blade to cut the bottom track off his cell door so he could slip out to attack a rival .
At the Estelle High - Security Unit , a gang member used scouring powder on a shoelace to do the same thing .
`` They spend all day , every day trying to come up with ways to beat us , '' said Michael Upshaw , warden of the Coffield cellblocks that house gang members .
`` And we work just as hard to keep them from doing that . ''
Four years ago , the white-supremacist Texas Aryan Brotherhood tried to turn itself into a religious group -- the Church of Aryan Christian Heritage Inc. -- as a way to force prison officials to let members meet and correspond unimpeded .
About the same time , the Fraternal Order of the Aryan Brotherhood was incorporated to promote an Aryan , Christian culture .
Its corporate address : the Terrell prison unit near Livingston , in East Texas .
Even in prison , the gangs maintain a hierarchy .
Rudy Cantu , listed by prison officials as a general in the Mexican Mafia , occupies a cell at the Coffield Unit .
But rather than talk with visitors , sometimes even guards , he speaks through a spokesman -- another convict on his cellblock .
`` This is the reality , '' he tells a reporter , rattling his cell door .
`` That is all I got to say . ''
He directs a reporter up one floor to another convict who , he says in Spanish , is his `` official spokesman . ''
That convict declines to talk .
The gangs have leaders who make major decisions for members at one or several prisons .
Some are called `` general , '' some `` president . ''
In some gangs , such as the Barrio Azteca at Coffield , rank can be denoted by the number of `` plumas , '' Spanish for feathers .
Joe Saldivar , a member of the Mexican Mafia incarcerated at the Estelle High - Security Unit , explains the hierarchy .
`` We might put somebody on restriction where we wo n't let him go out for rec .
But we try to do it as democratically as we can .
We pass around an envelope with different opinions on it .
Everybody has a chance to speak their piece ... .
We try to do it like they do it in a court of law . ''
While convicts deny it , prison officials say they also use the messaging system to order violent crimes outside prison , including murder .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">A federal indictment unsealed July 20 in San Antonio alleges that eight members of the Mexican Mafia carried out 14 murders in Texas between 1994 and 1997 , including one in a state prison in Brazoria County , in a conspiracy hatched inside and outside of prisons</ENAMEX> .
Such allegations can add to a gang 's clout inside the violent prison .
`` The members of these gangs do what they are told to do , '' Warden Price says .
`` If one of their leaders tells them to shut up , they shut up , because if they do n't , they know there 's consequences -- harsh consequences . ''
And that , he says , explains why the Barrio Azteca cellblock in B Wing `` is probably one of the cleanest ... one of the quietest cellblocks on the entire unit .
It 's all gangsters .
