AUSTIN , Texas --
Concerned about an increase in the discovery of contraband , some of it linked to gang activity and other security threats , Texas prison officials conducted a rare `` shakedown '' of the entire prison system to check for weapons and other contraband , a prison man said Tuesday .
`` We have seen a consistent increase in contraband and weapons in recent weeks and a real or perceived increase in some gang activity , and this is how we 're dealing with that , '' said Larry Todd , a spokesman for the Texas Department of Criminal Justice , which operates the system of prisons , state jails and substance-abuse treatment units .
`` So far , we 've found a lot of contraband like homemade cigarettes and cash money , and we 've also found one shank -LRB- a knifelike piece of sharpened metal -RRB- , '' Todd said .
`` All of those things are absolutely prohibited . ''
Also being seized were `` fishing lines , '' long poles made out of rolled-up paper that gang members use to pass messages through their cell bars at some prisons , he said .
`` Inmates are not happy about this , but this is a prison system , not a hotel chain , '' Todd said .
`` We did n't ask their permission . ''
Officials said 80 state prisons and 26 drug-treatment centers and state jails for nonviolent offenders were involved in the so-called `` lockdown '' that began Monday .
All convicts were confined to their cells and all work programs , prison factories and other activities were suspended .
Guards were conducting searches of most of the 144,000 convicts and their cells .
By late Tuesday , officials said the searches had been completed at more than half of Texas prisons .
`` Most units will be cleared by -LRB- today -RRB- -- or Friday at the latest at some of the largest units , '' Todd said .
While wardens routinely order temporary lockdowns to deal with problems on cellblocks or ally lock down an entire prison , Todd and other prison officials said it has been years since a systemwide lockdown was ordered .
The most notable such lockdown of the entire prison system occurred in the mid-1980s when warring prison gangs went on a months-long spree of murders and violence , leaving guards little able to control Texas ' institutions .
For months , prison officials have been warning that the growing influence of prison gangs -- both inside prisons and on the streets -- poses a new threat to prison security and public safety .
But Todd said gang problems alone are not the cause of the latest lockdown .
It was also not caused by the recent escape of convicted killer Martin Gurule from death row at the Ellis prison unit outside Huntsville .
Gurule , who died after escaping , was the only one of seven death row prisoners to make it out of the maximum-security unit in Texas ' largest such breakout attempt in years .
`` We are using this systemwide lockdown as a management tool to ensure that we clean out all contraband before our heaviest visitation period of the year begins at the end of this week -- for Christmas , '' Todd said .
`` We 're anticipating more free world visitors at our units during the next two weekends . ''
Mike Ward writes for the Austin American - Statesman , Austin , Texas .
