NEW YORK --
Omar Portee , known on the streets as O.G. Mack , the O.G. standing for Original Gangster , the founder of The United Blood Nation , or Bloods , and the best-known gang leader on the East Coast , left prison last June with a mission .
The Bloods gang , he thought , had become too much like what the police had always derided it as -- a constellation of barely connected street thugs in love with the cheap romance of coded language and symbolic tattoos .
They wore red , spouted gang slang and slashed and held people up -- and all too often black residents were their victims .
`` These Bloods on the street are young , '' Portee said in a recent interview .
`` They look in a few books or on the computer and think they know what we are about , you know what I 'm saying ?
This stuff they are doing is not coming from us .
We are willing to teach , but they got to listen .
Things have to change . ''
Portee said he is eager to give the Bloods an ideological orientation , to get them to practice political education and eradicate black-on-black crime .
During an interview in the Bronx -- one conducted with a great concern for secrecy -- Portee declared his own transformation complete .
`` I am a stranger to who I was when I went into prison , '' he said .
It was in prison on Rikers Island that Portee helped found New York 's version of the Bloods , and , not surprisingly , there is no shortage of law enforcement officials who insist that his pledge to turn the Bloods into an outfit devoted to political and cultural solidarity be regarded with the deepest skepticism .
`` This is n't about reform , it is about control , '' a senior member of the police department 's gang intelligence unit said of Portee .
`` It is about making money . ''
In fact , Portee 's reform effort has already met with more than skepticism .
There are those within the Bloods who have rejected his pitch as nonsense , an indication of his lost stature and , worse , faint-heartedness .
According to the police , who keep Portee under close surveillance , there are Bloods gang members actively trying to kill him .
That such confusion could reign in the world of the city 's No. 1 street gang is hardly shocking .
The true dimensions of the city 's gang problem , and the degree of hierarchy and coordination that exists between and within the gangs , has long been a subject of dispute .
Some law enforcement officials believe that the threat gangs pose is real and serious .
Others belittle the reach of gangs , saying that while real crimes have been committed by youths conversant in gang slang and wearing the clothes and tattoos that signify gang membership , the problem is less sophisticated and organized than it is in places like Los Angeles .
So while Portee and those in law enforcement offer different reasons for his attempt to organize the Bloods -- political mobilization vs. enhancing drug sales -- everyone agrees that his influence does not extend much beyond eight blocks along 183rd Street in the Bronx .
`` The real Bloods know what they got to do , '' Portee said .
`` I ai n't no preacher .
I 'm on the street .
I 'm with the Bloods .
I 'm not telling people to be church boys . ''
Portee , 28 , was at Rikers serving a sentence for attempted murder when he started the Bloods there in July 1993 .
He swiftly gathered hundreds of inmates behind him and broke the dominance within the prison system of the two major Latin gangs , the Netas and the Latin Kings .
His followers carried out dozens of slashings and assaults every month in the battle to control the cellblocks , according to correction officials .
Typically those who joined the Bloods in New York , inside or outside prison , first learned about O.G. Mack and how he started the gang in Rikers `` to fight oppression . ''
He became , to some , a symbol of defiance in the face of white authority .
There are correction officers , though , who say that much of Portee 's criminal celebrity can be attributed to mythmaking .
`` He kept himself out of trouble most of the time he was in prison , '' said Emmanuel H. Bailey , a deputy warden at Rikers who was the former head of the Gang Intelligence Unit .
`` He spread the word , educated people in Blood ideology and invented codes and sets .
He was the instigator , the man who manipulated those around him to carry out slashings and do his bidding .
He became an idol .
Everyone knew who O.G. Mack was , but he did n't do much himself .
He was the great pretender . ''
Portee , 28 , was raised by his grandmother and was arrested at age 16 for armed robbery .
After serving time at Rikers , he was released at 19 and drifted out to the West Coast , spending time with members of the Bloods gang in Los Angeles .
At 21 he was arrested again in the Bronx and was sent again to Rikers .
Portee created his own version of the Bloods upon his return to prison .
He founded 14 `` sets , '' or independent sub-groups , with names like Gangsta Killa Bloods or Valentine Bloods .
Portee 's `` One Eight Trey '' set is named for 183rd Street .
Like most sets , it has its own elaborate secret hand signals and codes .
There was , running through the recruitment of members and the coded language they adopted , something approaching an underlying philosophy -- one that mixed notions of black solidarity , a violent pledge not to be victimized by other gangs and an elaborate punishment system for those who violated the Bloods ' protocols .
If lacking in cohesive structure and a fully coherent ideology , the rough notion of a gang constituted by the Bloods in New York was enough to send the numbers of what police called gang-related crimes soaring in recent years .
With those coming out of prison carrying with them Bloods ideology , the concept of the Bloods was embraced by certain youths and used as a kind of rationale for crime , many of whose victims happened to be residents of the city 's predominantly black neighborhoods .
That , Portee said , was a perversion of the gang 's purpose .
He said he was offended that the Bloods had become small , disparate and often antagonistic groups , all wearing the red Bloods colors and spouting gang slang , much of it coined by him in the prison system .
`` Those of us in prison are not about fighting against the community , '' Portee said .
`` We are not about this black-on-black crime . ''
His heroes now are Bobby Seale , George Jackson and Huey P. Newton , whose books he read in prison , he said .
As a result he has , such as he can , suspended the induction of new Blood members , outlawed the practice of gang members sleeping with girls seeking to join and condemned slashing attacks , often a prerequisite for membership in a set , Portee said .
The axiom `` blood in , blood out , '' meaning that a gang member has to draw blood on a victim to join and be cut up to leave , has also been rejected .
He said many of the kids roaming the streets in the Bloods ' colors , using the hand signals , gang codes or slang , are uneducated .
If it is hard to assess Portee 's seriousness , it is harder to gauge his chances of success , given the anarchic nature of the Bloods in New York .
His newest followers , a half dozen of whom appeared with him one night in a Pizza Hut on Fordham Road with black and red bandannas covering the lower half of their faces , said the Bloods now model themselves after the Black Panthers and hope to `` help the community . ''
None , though , offered any specifics on what that help might be .
`` I have been on my own since I was 13 , '' said a 26-year -old woman , the mother of two children who would only give her street name of K - Loka .
`` I have been a victim of the system I am trying to overcome now , a broken home , foster care and prison .
I have a whole arsenal of books .
I study and read .
I was alone before , but in the United Blood Nation I have the power to change . ''
During the earlier interview in the Bronx , Portee , his 180-pound frame chiseled after years of weight-lifting in prison , paced around a small room in a housing project with restlessness that was dizzying .
His dark brown eyes were intense , anxious and distrustful .
Portee , who makes and sells shirts that read `` Black and Latino Love , '' at times seemed tired of what he calls `` the gansta life . ''
He often carries with him lined sheets of paper containing the flawless penmanship in which he has begun writing his life story , one he hopes he can publish as a book .
He has also recorded rap songs composed in prison in a small studio in the Bronx and would like to build a career as a recording artist .
Portee said , though , that his greatest focus was on staying alive .
The police said it is no longer safe for him to travel to Brooklyn and that he rarely leaves his own neighborhood .
Even there , they said , he has problems .
When one of Portee 's relatives called a reporter from a pay phone one afternoon to set up a meeting , done because Porte fears the police have tapped the phones of his family members , gun shots rent the air .
The woman shrieked for her children to take cover , and dropped the receiver .
`` There is a war in the ` hood , '' she said later .
Portee , aware that the authorities think his political effort is a fraud , and conscious that reforming his wayward gang members will not be easy , nonetheless keeps a brave , and straight , face .
`` I love all my Bloods , even the ones that hate me , '' he said .
