NEW YORK --
Gangster swank has always been with us , from the George Raft and Jimmy Cagney era through the Rat Pack and `` Goodfellas '' years .
You can see it still in the dark shirts and ties of Regis Philbin 's `` Who Wants to Be a Millionaire '' wardrobe , which might as well have been pinched from the closet of Tommaso Buscetta , a Sicilian Mafioso who inspired a men 's wear collection by Dolce & Gabbana .
Until a decade back , a gangster was a guy who suited up for business .
For fashion purposes , at least , he was probably of European ancestry and white .
Then , as new mobs began coming to power , they brought with them different modes of self-identification .
The peaked lapels and sharkskin suits of Hollywood hoodlums were supplanted by the superbaggy jeans and gang colors of the ` hood .
As urban fashion tracked the influence of street gangs , it also occasionally went deeper inside criminal culture for its inspiration .
It looked beyond the streets to jail .
Incarceration chic is everywhere lately , in the orange jumpsuits worn by the staff at the hip nightclub Centro Fly -LRB- nearly identical to models wholesaled to penitentiaries -RRB- and the jailhouse denims worn by the rapper Master P on the cover of The Source , a hip-hop magazine , for June .
It is also in the county-lockup look of kids at Brooklyn 's Fulton Mall , who sport generic blue or green uniform trousers , white sleeveless T -shirts and gang bandannas .
Explaining the look , Cadi Agueros , a stylist for Vibe magazine , said : `` The rawest street element is a jail element , so the strongest statement is a uniform with shirts and trousers that match perfectly , like a jail piece .
It 's like saying : ` I do n't need Girbaud or Mecca .
I can get a Fruit of the Loom three-pack of T -shirts for $ 7 . ' ''
Insiders can detect the sway of gang and prison culture on the iconography of seemingly innocuous brands .
One popular line of sports jerseys features the Yankees logo against a red background .
Another , produced by the urban wear label Fubu , highlights the numerals 05 .
`` You would n't necessarily think anything of it , '' explained Lt. Kevin Yorke , a police officer assigned to street gang investigations in Brooklyn .
`` Except that the Yankees do n't wear red . ''
It is however , the color of the Bloods , a gang whose local membership is estimated by the Corrections Department at 2,000 .
And 05 is , for Bloods , a number freighted with symbolism .
Yet , Yorke emphasized , `` just because you 're wearing them does n't mean you 're part of a gang . ''
And Daymond John , chief executive of Fubu , insists that the iconographic overlap is little more than coincidence .
`` If we limited our designs '' based on potential hidden meanings , he said , `` we 'd pretty much be making plain yellow clothes . ''
The sway of street style may be the best preserved of fashion secrets , exerting influence on everything from haute couture to the unstoppable urban-wear juggernaut .
It has turned up in the form of denim B -boy ball gowns on Jean - Paul Gaultier 's runway .
It is the force behind the voluminous low-hanging baggy , which was said to be inspired by the fact that inmates rarely get to keep their belts .
You can spot it in fads for sneakers without laces , jeans with one cuff rolled up and , lately , in the widespread adoption of ironed gang bandannas , or flags .
The most recent wave of thug-style dressing `` is coming about in a weird way , '' said Duane Pyous , associate photo editor of Vibe .
`` Hip -hop covered this area before , '' he continued , `` but the kids on the street are into it again . ''
Partly , he added , this is in response to the music 's mainstreaming , an attempt to restore street energy to a genre sometimes accused of growing flabby .
And partly it is a reaction to the ostentation of stars like Lil ' Kim , who are accused of forgetting their roots and of starting to preen or `` floss . ''
`` That ` Sean Puffy Combs flossing in a white fur coat ' look is not that interesting , '' Pyous said .
`` The jailhouse look is back because it 's about rawness , hardness and credibility . ''
It 's also , perhaps , about the fact that the United States now jails more people than any other country in the world .
It becomes increasingly difficult to conceive of jails as institutions outside society when you consider that the number of incarcerated Americans approaches the combined populations of Idaho , Wyoming and Montana .
`` Let 's face it , there 's a lot of incarcerated people in the United States , and a lot of those are young people , '' said Alphonse McCullough , a senior editor at The Source .
`` Those people come out of jail , and they take a part of that culture with them .
Folks I 've known who were locked up get released with their prison gear on , so they keep it .
Folks in L.A. have been wearing county blues for a long , long time . ''
Well before the Gap reinstated khakis , they were the uniform of Los Angeles ' Chicano gangs , who wore their jail-issued trousers as a badge of pride .
`` Fashion is always coming back to the boulevard for inspiration , '' McCullough said .
`` This time around , it 's getting a little grittier and taking it to the prison yard . ''
It will come as a surprise to many , no doubt , that the prison yard could have connotations of glamour .
For that matter , it would have been hard to foresee a vogue for `` wife beaters , '' as Stanley Kowalski -style tank tops are called on the street , worn both as shirts and head scarfs ; for Hanes T -shirts as must-haves ; or for tight nylon do-rags and bandannas manufactured even by Tommy Hilfiger , the mass-market designer , who jumped the trend by introducing a line of logo skullcaps two years back .
`` The prison look is a backlash against these urban labels , '' said Kevin Burrus , a New Jersey -based party promoter who dresses `` thug style , '' as he stood on 125th Street last week .
`` Back in the day , Gucci and Calvin Klein were what it was all about .
You had status on your behind .
Now , it 's Sean Puffy Combs charging you $ 75 for a pair of jeans .
And I say to the label freaks : ` Those people whose names you 're wearing have pool filters .
You understand ?
And you do n't even have a pool ! '
So when you put on the headpiece , the handkerchief , the do-rag , it 's a look that 's defying all that . ''
The allure of jail-style apparel is strong enough even for prisons themselves to get into the business .
Prison Blues , with 30,000 units sold a year , is hardly a major retail force .
Yet , under its parent authority , the Oregon Corrections Department , the corporation operates www.prisonblues.com , a thriving Web site , which sells to West Coast chains like Wilco and recently found its inmate-made denims on the hot e-commerce children 's site Katrillion .
`` We play the cachet of being prison-manufactured two ways , '' John Borchert , the operations director for Prison Blues , said from Portland .
`` It 's a strong sales point in the fashion market .
In the work-wear market we just say , ` U.S .
Made . ' ''
The demand for prison-style work clothes has helped sales tremendously , said Mark Ross , Prison Blues ' marketing director .
`` Our customer base used to be 95 percent work wear , but in the last six months alone , our business has shifted to 15 percent fashion accounts , '' he added .
PNB Nation , an urban-wear subsidiary of Perry Ellis , with annual revenues of $ 20 million , has produced a runway show full of jailhouse looks , including denims that resemble prison-yard suits and T -shirts with fake docket numbers on the front .
