WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Clinton administration officials said they did n't believe China 's rare public confirmation of its nuclear weapons capabilities had anything to do with increasing tensions between China and Taiwan .
But some lawmakers feared Beijing was `` saber rattling . ''
`` We do n't see the connection on Taiwan , '' State Department spokesman James Rubin said Thursday after an official in Beijing announced what U.S. intelligence officials long have known , that China has the neutron bomb .
Taipei drew a threat of attack from China this week when it hinted that the island was ready to move toward independence .
`` I do n't think it 's been as dramatic as other rhetorical episodes in the past , but it is significant , '' Rubin added .
`` We do n't think it 's beneficial for these kind of statements to be made or the reactions to them . ''
China is known to have exploded a neutron bomb in 1988 .
But in an extraordinary admission Thursday , Zhao Qizheng , the chief Chinese government spokesman , said in Beijing that Chinese scientists had developed neutron bombs and miniaturized atomic warheads in the 1970s and ' 80s , without stealing U.S. secrets .
He also gave details of Chinese programs to develop anti-submarine microwave technology , missile design techniques and technology to launch multiple satellites from a single rocket .
On Capitol Hill , key lawmakers were concerned about China 's intentions .
Through a spokeswoman , Sen. Richard Shelby , R - Ala. , chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee , said , `` The timing of China 's announcement could be perceived as saber rattling . ''
Sen. Bob Kerrey , D - Neb. , senior Democrat on the committee , called China 's announcement `` quite serious . ''
`` It is an escalation of the proliferation problem , '' Kerrey said .
`` They were starting to move in the right direction .
It means they are now moving in the wrong direction .
This is not in the world 's best interests . ''
And House International Relations Committee Chairman Benjamin Gilman , R - N.Y. , said the Chinese announcement was `` sort of a clouded threat to Taiwan at this point . ''
`` Why did they suddenly make this announcement when this has been an understood fact for a number of years ? ''
Gilman said it sends a `` clear signal to the administration '' and `` they should recognize that this engagement with China is not doing what it should be doing . ''
In light of heightened tensions with China , administration officials did take care to note that the U.S. nuclear arsenal is vastly superior to China 's .
`` China , we know , has less than two dozen long-range nuclear weapons .
The United States has over 6,000 , '' White House press secretary Joe Lockhart said .
`` We have no doubt that our nuclear deterrent is strong enough to protect our national interests . ''
The announcement about the neutron bomb came in reaction to a congressional investigation led by Rep. Christopher Cox , R - Calif. , into allegations the Chinese stole sensitive nuclear secrets from U.S. research labs .
Cox said the announcement suggested nothing that would take away from the findings that China `` acquired weapons information through espionage , including specifically information about the neutron bomb . ''
`` We have the ritual denial of espionage , but apart from that it is the first public acknowledgment that indeed they possess a neutron bomb which they had not yet deployed , '' Cox said .
Defense Secretary William Cohen said that from a security standpoint , whether China developed its own neutron bomb instead of stealing the technology from U.S. labs was a minor issue .
He said the United States was more concerned about other nations gaining nuclear technology .
`` I do n't find it to be a particularly fruitful discussion as to whether they claim to have this capability internally or have acquired it elsewhere , '' Cohen said .
`` The fact that 's of concern to all of us is that there seems to be a proliferation of nuclear technology to a number of countries . ''
Neutron bombs are meant to produce a smaller blast than conventional nuclear weapons but more intense radiation , limiting physical damage while killing large numbers of people .
