ABOARD THE HANIT MISSILE BOAT
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Bursting nose first from the water like its namesake , Israel 's new Dolphin submarine surfaced for the first time in its home waters today .
The Dolphin is the first of three German -built diesel-powered submarines to be delivered to Israel .
The squat , cigar-shaped vessel is aimed at helping transform Israel 's aging underwater fleet into a modern attack-and-deter force .
With a crew of 35 , the Dolphin has enough range to sneak undetected into ports as far away as the Persian Gulf , send frogmen to plant mines and destroy ships .
The three submarines carry sub- Harpoon sea-to-sea missiles .
Foreign experts say they can be replaced by small cruise missiles carrying nuclear warheads .
Analyst Yiftah Shapir of the Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies at Tel Aviv University said he believes Israel will be able to fashion a nuclear warhead small enough to fit the Dolphin .
If Israel were attacked with nuclear weapons , missiles aboard the Dolphin would be unharmed and ready for retaliation , according to foreign weapons experts .
With Iran and Iraq trying to acquire nuclear weapons , Israel saw the need for a second-strike capability , the experts said .
The Israeli military and the government do n't talk about the subject .
The mood was festive today as the Israeli navy and Israeli Prime Minister and Defense Minister Ehud Barak greeted the Dolphin about 12 miles off the northern port of Haifa .
`` Dolphin is only the first of three submarines ... that will change the entire face of the navy and the long-arm capabilities of Israel , '' Barak said at the ceremony .
Under clear skies and on calm seas , six gray Israeli missile boats circled the new submarine , sending greetings by loudspeaker to its crew as four F -16 warplanes flew overhead in formation .
Reflecting friendly interservice rivalry , an officer on the Hanit missile boat remarked that it was one of the few times the air force has saluted the navy .
`` It 's a great feeling , and emotional , too , '' said Capt. Yuval , the commander of the submarine flotilla that sailed with the Dolphin from Germany to Haifa Bay .
He was plucked from the two-tone green vessel to talk to reporters aboard the Hanit .
Yuval , whose last name cannot be used under Israeli military regulations , said the Dolphin gives Israel `` a lot of confidence and ability under the water '' that it did not have before .
Israel contracted with Germany to have two Dolphin -class submarines built to Israeli specifications in 1989 .
In 1990 , it canceled the project because of its high cost -- $ 300 million per submarine .
Israel decided to renew the project after the 1991 Persian Gulf War , when Iraq fired 39 Scud missiles at the Jewish state .
Germany offered to pay for two submarines .
The Israeli military said today that one factor in the German decision was the role of German companies in developing Iraq 's chemical warheads .
`` As a result , the German government offered humanitarian and military support , '' the military said in a statement .
In 1994 , a third submarine was added , with Israel and Germany splitting the cost .
The second submarine is to be delivered in October and the third in 2000 .
