MOSCOW
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- The Russian navy struggled Monday to rescue more than 100 sailors trapped at the bottom of the Barents Sea in a submarine crippled by a major collision .
The chance of a happy ending , the navy chief conceded , was `` not very high . ''
The Kursk , one of Russia 's biggest nuclear submarines , was apparently involved in a collision before it plunged hundreds of feet to the sea floor near the Arctic Circle on Sunday , naval commander Admiral Vladimir Kuroyedov said .
It had been taking part in naval exercises off the country 's north coast .
Russian officials said the vessel was carrying no nuclear weapons and its nuclear reactors had been switched off , but the reports of serious damage raised concerns about a possible radioactive leak .
Russian and Western submarines sometimes play cat-and-mouse games in the area and have scraped each other in the past , according to reports .
But the Pentagon said Monday no U.S. ship or submarine was involved in the collision .
Ten Russian ships were in the area where the submarine went down .
`` Despite all the efforts being taken , the probability of a successful outcome from the situation with the Kursk is not very high , '' the navy chief said .
The Kursk was examined by a bell-shaped deep-water apparatus late Monday and a decision on how to conduct a rescue would likely be made Tuesday , according to Russian news reports .
ITAR - Tass new agency said the outside inspection of the vessel did not support Adm. Kuroyedov 's version of a collision .
It quoted an expert involved in the operation as saying the submarine could have been damaged by a blast in its bow which caused the torpedo section to fill with water .
A team of ship designers was rushed to the area to help suggest ways to rescue the crew .
The condition of the crew was unknown .
The navy said at first that it was in radio contact with the submarine , but later admitted that there was only `` acoustic contact '' that could be the noise of crewmen pounding on the hull .
Navy officials declined to say how long the Kursk could remain submerged before it ran out of air for the crew .
Nuclear submarines depend on their reactors to replenish their air supplies .
The Kursk went down far above the Arctic Circle , but the sea was free of icebergs , said meteorological officials in nearby Norway .
Navy officials declined to say how far down the vessel was trapped , but a Norwegian report said the Kursk was some 450 feet down , a depth at which rescue would be difficult because of the crushing water pressure .
Various Russian reports said the submarine was 330 to 510 feet down .
White House spokesman Joe Lockhart said the administration `` made clear to the Russians that any assistance we can offer is available . ''
He said national security adviser Sandy Berger reiterated this in a telephone conversation with Russian officials .
`` At this point there 's been no request for our assistance , '' Lockhart added .
Navy spokesman Igor Dygalo said the Oscar -class submarine was not carrying nuclear weapons .
The Kursk is designed to carry 24 nuclear armed cruise missiles designed to knock out large surface vessels such as aircraft carriers .
But some Western military analysts were skeptical .
`` Normally , all submarines go to sea equipped for war .
I would be surprised if they had gone to sea without something , '' said Paul Beaver , a British analyst .
There was also concern about a possible radiation leak from the vessel 's two nuclear reactors .
`` The problem with the nuclear propulsion system is that if the submarine has damaged itself while it was running aground , then you 've got a reasonable chance that there will be some sort of radioactive leakage , '' said Lionel Trippett of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament .
Norway , which has a scientific vessel in the region , detected no sign of a radiation leak , said Norwegian Foreign Ministry spokesman Karsten Klepsvik .
Vladimir Gundarov , a submarine specialist at Red Star , the official daily newspaper of the Russian military , said rescuing people from a submarine is very difficult and there is no set procedure .
The Russian navy does not have advanced submarine rescue vessels , according to standard naval reference works .
The crew may be able to use on-board capsules to escape , but in the worst case would have to swim out through the torpedo tubes , which would be very dangerous , he said .
In a 1983 Soviet submarine accident , the crew perished when trying to escape from a depth of 180 feet , according to the Norwegian environmental group Bellona , which closely monitors Russia 's northern fleet .
The Kursk , launched in 1995 , carries 107 personnel and weighs some 14,000 tons , according to Jane 's Fighting Ships , an authoritative guide to warships .
Russian nuclear submarines have been involved in a string of accidents in recent decades .
The navy , like the rest of the Russian military , is desperately short of money and performs almost no maintenance on its ships .
In the last major accident involving one of Moscow 's nuclear submarines , the Komsomolets sank in April 1989 after catching fire 200 miles north of Norway .
Forty -two of the 69 Soviet sailors aboard died in the accident and the wrecked hull with its reactor still lies on the sea bottom .
