WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- The Cold War threat of all-out nuclear war has long since faded .
Submarine operations remain potentially hazardous .
Does the United States really need more submarines lurking beneath the surface of the world 's oceans ?
The Navy says yes , but not because it expects to use them to launch nuclear missiles across the globe .
The role of submarines like the Russian vessel that sank in the Barents Sea is changing , largely to take advantage of their inherent `` stealth '' in avoiding detection while playing the role of silent and unseen spy .
Skeptics say the subs are Cold War relics in search of a mission .
`` They do n't even attempt to justify it on the basis of a war-fighting capability , '' said Eugene Carroll of the private Center for Defense Information .
A retired Navy admiral and frequent critic of the service , Carroll is contemptuous of the argument that a bigger submarine fleet is needed for intelligence purposes .
`` It 's contrived , '' he said .
The Pentagon is considering a 20 percent increase in the submarine fleet -- from 56 attack subs today to 68 by the year 2015 -- and it is spending tens of billions of dollars on a new generation of attack subs , called the Virginia -class submarine .
This commitment comes a decade after Congress halted the Navy 's building of new Seawolf attack submarines at three instead of the planned 29 .
The Virginia -class subs will play a variety of roles , with special emphasis on intelligence gathering and `` special operations '' such as search and rescue , reconnaissance , sabotage and diversionary attacks .
The Russian sub fleet , once the largest in the world , has not evolved so much as it has eroded .
Its numbers have dropped from about 200 during the Cold War to about 20 today , including 11 Oscar II -class submarines of the type that sank in the Barents Sea .
Because of a lack of resources for training , maintenance and modernization , Russian submarines spend far more time in port than they do at sea .
The United States has pared its submarine fleet in the past decade as it has reduced the overall military .
The Navy now is pushing to reverse that peacetime trend by arguing that intelligence-collection demands have grown far beyond what the current fleet of 56 nuclear-powered attack subs can handle .
The U.S. Navy also has 18 Trident submarines armed with intercontinental ballistic missiles .
These behemoths , based at Bangor , Wash. , and King 's Bay , Ga. , form one leg of the U.S. `` triad '' of strategic nuclear weapons , along with long-range bombers and ICBMs based in underground silos .
The Navy is considering converting four Tridents from their strategic nuclear role to a specialized combination of missions : firing non-nuclear cruise missiles like the Tomahawks used in last year 's Kosovo air war ; transporting Navy SEAL commandos , and possibly launching unmanned surveillance aircraft .
It is the intelligence mission , however , that the Navy sees as the main argument for rebuilding the sub force .
Adm. Frank L. Bowman , director of naval nuclear propulsion , said in a recent interview with Pentagon reporters that the number of `` intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance '' missions -- essentially spy missions -- has doubled over the past 10 years while the number of submarines has been cut almost in half .
`` I do n't think we will ever be able to make do with fewer subs '' than currently planned , Bowman said .
The number of U.S. attack subs has declined from 93 in 1991 , the year the Soviet Union dissolved , to 56 today , with an additional seven Los Angeles -class attack subs scheduled to be decommissioned .
Bowman said the Navy is leaning toward retaining four of those seven by refueling their reactors .
Submarines still have a war-fighting mission , and that was the role the Russian sub Kursk was practicing when it sank last weekend during a major exercise with a Russian aircraft carrier and other ships .
Not coincidentally , two American submarines were nearby , watching the exercise from the icy waters of the Barents Sea , a major thoroughfare from the big Russian naval port at Murmansk on the Kola Peninsula .
During the Cold War , the main purpose of shadowing Soviet submarines was to watch for indications of preparations for starting World War III .
The same was true of Soviet subs monitoring the U.S. coasts .
Warning of surprise attack was a precious commodity , and subs were a critical part of that effort .
But with fear of a global nuclear conflict almost gone , navies have not lost their love of submarines .
A growing number of nations are acquiring subs -- powered by diesel and electric power , rather than nuclear power like those of the American and Russian boats -- to flex muscle in or near their home waters .
Israel , for example , has contracted with Germany to buy three Dolphin diesel-powered subs .
The first was delivered last year .
Iran has a small submarine force , which U.S. military officials have said provides a mine-laying capability in the Gulf that worries them .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">One of Iran 's main suppliers has been Russia , which also has sold diesel-electric Kilo -class submarines to China in recent years and has sold sub salvage to North Korea </ENAMEX>.
The Pentagon estimates there are about 600 submarines in the world 's waters today .
-- On the Net : Navy fast-attack submarines : http : //www.chinfo.navy.mil/navpalib/cno/n87/ssn.html Navy submarine warfare : http : //www.chinfo.navy.mil/navpalib/cno/n87/n87.html
