The theft of U.S. ballistic missile-related technology is of great value to the P.R.C. In addition to ICBM 's and military spacelift rockets , such technology is directly applicable to the and short-range P.L.A. missiles , such as the CSS -6 -LRB- also known as the M -9 -RRB- , the CSS - X -7 -LRB- also known as the M -11 -RRB- and the CSS -8 that have been developed for , among other purposes , striking Taiwan .
CSS -6 missiles were , for example , fired in the Taiwan Strait and over Taiwan 's main ports in the 1996 crisis and confrontation with the United States .
The Select Committee has uncovered instances of the P.R.C. 's use of this specific stolen U.S. technology that : -- Enhance the P.R.C. 's military capabilities -- Jeopardize U.S. national security interests -- Pose a direct threat to the United States , our friends and allies , or our forces The Clinton Administration has determined that particular uses by the P.R.C. of this stolen U.S. technology cannot be disclosed publicly without affecting national security .
The P.R.C. has proliferated weapons systems and components to other countries including Iran , Pakistan , Libya , Syria , and North Korea .
B. In the late 1990 's , the P.R.C. stole or illegally obtained U.S. developmental and research technology that , if taken to successful conclusion , could be used to attack U.S. satellites and submarines .
During the late l990 's , U.S. research and development work on electromagnetic weapons technology has been illegally obtained by the P.R.C. as a result of successful espionage directed against the United States .
Such technology , once developed , can be used for space -based weapons to attack satellites and missiles .
In 1997 , the P.R.C. stole classified U.S. developmental research concerning very sensitive detection techniques that , if successfully concluded , could be used to threaten U.S. submarines .
C. Currently -deployed P.R.C. ICBM 's targeted on the United States are based in significant part on U.S. technologies illegally obtained by the P.R.C. in the 1950 's .
This illustrates the potential long-term effects of technology loss .
Even in today 's rapidly changing technological environment , technology losses can have long-term adverse effects .
Currently deployed P.R.C. ICBM 's targeted on the United States are based on U.S. and Russian technologies from the 1950 's and 1960 's .
In the 1950 's , a U.S. military officer and associated members of the design team for a U.S. ICBM program -LRB- the Titan missile program -RRB- emigrated to the P.R.C. and illegally gave U.S. missile and missile-related technology to the P.R.C. This information formed the basis for the up to two dozen P.R.C. CSS -4 ICBM 's that are currently targeted on the United States .
All but two of these missiles have been deployed by the P.R.C. for the first time in this decade .
D. In the aftermath of three failed satellite launches since 1992 , U.S. satellite manufacturers transferred missile design information and know-how to the P.R.C. without obtaining the legally required licenses .
This information has improved the reliability of P.R.C. rockets useful for civilian and military purposes .
The illegally transmitted information is useful for the design and improved reliability of future P.R.C. ballistic missiles , as well .
U.S. satellite manufacturers analyzed the causes of three P.R.C. launch failures and recommended improvements to the reliability of the P.R.C. rockets .
These launch failure reviews were conducted without required Department of State export licenses , and communicated technical information to the P.R.C. in violation of the International Traffic in Arms Regulations .
The Select Committee has concluded that the P.R.C. implemented a number of the recommended improvements to rocket guidance and to the fairing -LRB- or nose cone -RRB- , which protects a satellite during launch .
These improvements increased the reliability of the P.R.C. Long March rockets .
It is almost certain that the U.S. satellite manufacturers ' recommendations led to improvements in the P.R.C. 's rockets and that the improvements would not have been considered or implemented so soon without the U.S. assistance .
It is possible or even likely that , absent the U.S. satellite manufacturers ' interventions on the problems associated with the defective fairing on the P.R.C. 's Long March 2E rocket and the defective guidance system on the P.R.C. 's Long March 3B rocket , one or more other P.R.C. launches would have failed .
The P.R.C. Long March rockets improved by the U.S. technology assistance are useful for both commercial and military purposes .
The military uses include launching : -- Military communications and reconnaissance satellites -- Space -based sensors -- Space -based weapons , if successfully developed -- Satellites for modern command and control and sophisticated intelligence collection
