The Untold Story of American Submarine Espionage .
By Sherry Sontag and Christopher Drew .
Illustrated .
352 pp .
New York : Public Affairs .
$ 25 .
-- THE SONAR WAR BY TIMOTHY NAFTALI -LRB- Distributed by New York Times Special Features -RRB- In 1968 , two ballistic missile submarines , one Soviet and one American , died similar deaths .
In each case an unexpected explosion set off a series of catastrophic events culminating in a dramatic plunge to depths where submarines collapse from bow to stern like accordions .
Entombed in these blocks of steel were 200 men .
Although the Cold War ended less than a decade ago , it is farther away from us emotionally than World War II .
There is something about the carnage and moral certainties of that war that makes it accessible even to the notoriously ahistorical Generation X. But the Cold War , with the notable exception of the morality play of Vietnam , seems in retrospect a time of contingency plans and unrealized fears , now gratefully dissipated .
Yet every day for over 40 years , young Russians and Americans went to very difficult jobs not knowing whether that day would be their last .
It is fashionable now to play down the fears of the statesmen , to describe as manipulative or insincere presidential or Kremlin statements of concern .
But what is beyond doubt is the fear that the individual sailor , pilot or spy periodically felt in doing his duty .
In deftly exploring the lives of engineers and sailors who spied on Soviet power from the depths of the world 's oceans , Sherry Sontag and Christopher Drew have produced an evocative and important look at the Cold War .
`` Blind Man 's Bluff : The Untold Story of American Submarine Espionage '' is also satisfying to read , at times hurtling forward with the speed of a Polaris submarine .
The use of submarines to plumb Soviet intentions and capabilities involved some of the most secret , or blackest , American projects of the Cold War .
Sontag , who has covered government and international affairs for The National Law Journal , and Drew , who is a reporter at The New York Times , cultivated veteran submariners who talked for the first time about spying .
With the help of Annette Lawrence Drew and of an intrepid Russian colleague , they tracked down Soviet counterparts where appropriate , and set the sea stories into a wider Cold War context .
The effect is a compelling study of magnificent men and spying machines .
Take the case of Capt. James E. Bradley Jr. , a diesel submariner with World War II service .
One of the frustrating truths of the Cold War was that it was always extremely difficult to figure out what the Russians intended to do .
Unlike General Eisenhower in World War II , President Dwight D. Eisenhower and his successors were rarely presented by their intelligence chiefs with the high-level strategic chatter of their adversary .
The Russians took better care with their codes and ciphers than the Nazis .
Bradley , who by 1966 was director of undersea warfare for the Office of Naval Intelligence , came up with an ingenious partial solution : why not bug transmissions that the Russians would assume could not be bugged ?
Recalling the signs `` Cable Crossing .
Do Not Anchor Cables '' from childhood days on the Mississippi , Bradley assumed that Russian shores would have similar warnings posted for underwater telephone cables .
In 1971 , with its periscope up , the nuclear submarine Halibut secretly traced the Siberian coastline and confirmed Bradley 's hunch .
After divers attached the largest telephone tap ever made to a cable on the floor of the Sea of Okhotsk , a stream of useful information about Soviet naval deployments and military exercises flowed to Washington .
Had the Russians ever prepared for a first nuclear strike , this tap would have provided critical warning .
Code -named `` Ivy Bells , '' this source would remain active for a decade , one of the greatest intelligence hauls of the Cold War , until an American , Ronald Pelton , sold the secret to the Russians in 1980 .
The authors also provide simple stories of individual courage , beginning with a thrilling episode from the first days of Cold War submarine spying .
The diesel submarine was about as inhospitable a place to work as one could imagine .
Smelly and moist , these 120-foot long canisters were often buffeted by waves .
And they were vulnerable .
If they did n't regularly approach the surface to pull fresh air in through a snorkel , their batteries would lose their charge while the crew suffocated from carbon dioxide in the air .
With fear growing in 1949 that the Soviet Union would soon deploy its versions of U -boats in the open seas , the Navy sent submarines close to Soviet ports to follow such vessels or listen to their communications .
As Sontag and Drew tell it , crews on the Tusk and the Cochino , with newly trained spooks aboard , learned that year that even in the Cold War the greatest adversary could be the sea .
On -board nuclear reactors would eventually scrub submarines of the pervasive `` Eau de Diesel '' and allow them to sail underwater for months at a time , but this progress reduced neither the tension nor the dangers of underwater spying .
By the mid-60 's , the arms race extended into the seas .
Not only were the Russians deploying nuclear tipped ballistic missiles on submarines , but the French and the superpowers were using the ocean as a firing range to test new missiles .
Among the new American fleet of nuclear submarines were spy boats with specially designed hulls to permit deep-water investigations , to detect strategic Soviet junk and when necessary to violate Soviet territorial waters .
The twin submarine disasters of 1968 provided a test of the new American approach to the deep .
That year the Russians lost a Golf class diesel submarine in the Pacific , while the American nuclear attack submarine Scorpion disappeared on its way back to Norfolk , Va .
In a mark of the sophistication of the naval spy game by that time , neither the White House nor the Kremlin blamed the other for the unexplained disappearance of a ballistic missile submarine .
Unlike the United States , however , Moscow had no way of finding its sailors .
Soviet submariners were trained to send signals from predetermined points along a tight path from the motherland to their firing positions off the American coast .
BC - NYTBOOK - BLUFF -2NDTAKE- NYTSF UNDATED : coast . -RRB-
The Russian sub 's failure to send its position triggered a desperate search by a dozen Soviet ships .
But Moscow lacked the underwater technology to investigate the ocean floor for her dead .
Five years earlier , the loss of 129 men on the American nuclear submarine Thresher had inspired the Navy to promote a serious deep-water program to investigate wrecks .
In 1968 this program grabbed the attention of the White House by finding the Scorpion 11,000 feet below the surface , and by locating the Soviet sub 1,700 miles northwest of Hawaii , with its complement of cipher machines and nuclear weapons .
This hunt seemed to capture the spirit of the entire Cold War .
Not only did technological prowess permit Americans to set new standards for the Russians to match , but it also led to costly American overreaching .
Learning of the Navy 's achievement , the C.I.A. persuaded the White House to finance a joint venture with Howard Hughes to recover the Soviet submarine from the Pacific floor .
Warned that the submarine was too fragile and would break apart under the stresses of a climb to the surface , the C.I.A. went ahead anyway -- and 90 percent of the Soviet sub sheared away as it was lifted by the Hughes -designed ship Glomar Explorer in 1974 .
The C.I.A. found only six Russian corpses in the portion brought to the surface .
So was all this courage and innovation worth it ?
The authors are careful not to offer grand theories .
However , they suggest that espionage played a significant role .
It reduced uncertainties and increased confidence that neither superpower was bent on blowing up the world .
But it also increased the tension of the Cold War , the need to follow enemy submarines closely , to enter hostile waters and to push old ships beyond their limits .
The Russians did not rely as much as the Americans on this highly technological spying , but they enjoyed equally dramatic results .
From 1967 until the mid-80 's , an American Navy officer , John Walker , and some members of his family gave the Russians the keys to copying our submarine technology and to following changes in our naval doctrine .
As Soviet ships got quieter , their payloads more dangerous and their use wiser , the need for American spying increased .
Until the very last days of the Cold War , in the rarefied world of undersea chess , ignorance seemed the greatest danger .
With their book , Sontag and Drew introduce us to one of the least known and most harrowing battlefields of the superpower conflict .
-- Timothy Naftali , director of the program on contemporary political history at the University of Virginia 's Miller Center of Public Affairs , is a co-author of `` One Hell of a Gamble : Khrushchev , Castro and Kennedy , 1958-1964 . ''
-- -LRB- Nonsubscribers : To publish this article , call a New York Times Syndicate sales representative , Bob Farnell , Olivia Vasquez or Connie White , at -LRB- 888 -RRB- 2- NYTSYN -LRB- 888-269-8796 -RRB- .
