MOSCOW --
With Russia in financial meltdown and its political leaders paralyzed , US and Russian specialists are increasingly concerned about the threat posed by the country 's vast nuclear arsenal .
Russia has about 7,000 nuclear warheads and several thousand more nuclear bombs and other devices , though no one seems to agree on an exact count .
The important questions are how many of them are well-guarded and how many are simply decaying , half-forgotten , in fenced-in cities .
In a rapidly deteriorating economy where little funding is available for maintaining secure facilities and the people who work in them , US officials worry that nuclear weapons and materials could end up in the hands of terrorists or pariah states .
`` The main concern remains -LRB- that -RRB- with the economy in trouble , it is a constant challenge to make sure no one with access to these materials crosses the line and tries to smuggle or sell it , '' one senior US official said Wednesday , when Presidents Clinton and Yeltsin signed two minor nuclear-control agreements .
One of the deals , on converting 50 tons of Russian weapons-grade plutonium into material unusable for weapons , addresses concerns raised by US officials and Russian and American analysts about the safety of weapons that have been dismantled under arms reduction agreements .
Another measure signed Wednesday would set up a system for the United States and Russia to share information on launches of ballistic missiles and space rockets .
Senior US officials say they have significant confidence that Russia 's active nuclear missiles are properly safeguarded .
It is the dozens of nuclear facilities spread throughout the former Soviet republics that have given the US military its greatest anxiety .
The combination of the disparate facilities , many of them storehouses for plutonium and uranium left over from the Cold War , and the failing Russian economy provide a potentially terrifying mix .
Officials fear that military personnel , many of whom are low paid or unpaid these days , will smuggle or sell plutonium and uranium to terrorists , rogue states , or US enemies such as Iraq .
Twice in recent years , the United States has mounted operations to remove significant amounts of weapons grade plutonium from former Soviet republics where they were at risk of being smuggled , last year in Kazakhstan and this year in Georgia .
Likewise , US officials and other analysts remain fearful that former Soviet nuclear scientists , left unemployed and destitute by the end of the Cold War , may begin selling their knowledge to developing nuclear states such as North Korea .
`` Those would be the first people I would pay , '' said Stan Norris , an analyst on nuclear weapons for the Natural Resources Defense Council in Washington .
`` If you do n't pay your nuclear weapon designers and they ca n't feed their families , then they might be tempted . ''
In July , nuclear physicists in Sarov , the closed research city that designed much of Russia 's atomic arsenal , went on a brief strike to protest late paychecks .
Ivan Gradobitov , head of the nuclear industry workers union , said even top specialists faced pay delays of up to five months .
Nuclear industry workers plan to hold another protest next week .
To try to stem the risk , the US Department of Energy has created at least two programs , though they conceded that the risk still exists .
Energy officials have set up contracts with some 45 nuclear sites in the former Soviet Union to help upgrade the facilities , officials here said .
Those officials said the pact signed Wednesday that calls for each country to dissassemble 50 metric tons of weapons grade plutonium will also ease the anxieties of the US military .
At the same time , officials have established a program that allows the US government to , in essence , hire former Soviet nuclear scientists to assure that they remain gainfully employed and not susceptible to the overtures of a terrorist state .
In July , the United States slapped sanctions on seven Russian defense industry companies it suspects of aiding Iran in that country 's quest to build nuclear missiles .
The Russian government says it is investigating the cases .
Most analysts say Russia has done much to consolidate the vast nuclear arsenal of the Soviet Union , which comprised over 50,000 nuclear devices , and was as late as 1991 spread throughout over 500 sites in the former Soviet republics and Eastern Europe .
Russia reportedly has made efforts to remove weapons from unstable parts of the country , such as the north Caucasus regions near the separatist republic of Chechnya .
`` The Russian nuclear arsenal is greatly reduced and over time it is atrophying , '' said Robert L. Pfaltzgraff , professor of international security studies at Tufts ' Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy .
Some analysts say Russia 's arsenal could before long be reduced by decay to fewer than the 3,000 warheads mandated by the 1993 Start - II agreement , which the Russian parliament has yet to ratify .
But Russia remains a country committed to a strong nuclear deterrent as part of its defense doctrine , especially in the wake of its conventional military 's disastrous failure to defeat poorly armed militants in Chechnya .
As a result , Russia continues to develop new weapons , even as it dismantles old weapons .
Pavel Felgenhauer , defense analyst for the Russian daily Segodnya , said Russia has already produced 40 new SS -27 missiles , which have a capability to avoid detection by anti-ballistic missiles systems .
And as Russia 's weapons grow older , many are being decommissioned , often in ways that pose a threat , if not of falling into the hands of nuclear terrorists or pariah states , then to the environment .
Felgenhauer said that thousands of tactical nuclear weapons have been `` taken apart and thrown in plutonium pits and factories , where it 's dismantled and lying around . ''
Tamara Robinson , a senior research associate at the Monterey Institute of International Studies in California , said Russia 's 73 nuclear-powered submarines , including some 26 that carry ballistic missiles and 12 with nuclear-tipped cruise missiles , also pose a security risk .
Wednesday , after meeting Clinton at a discussion with other governors and opposition leaders , Alexander Lebed , the tough-talking possible presidential candidate , said he had told the US president to beware a repeat of the Bolshevik revolution in Russia .
`` I told him today the situation in Russia is catastrophic .
The situation is worse than in 1917 , '' Lebed said .
`` Now we have huge stockpiles of poorly guarded nuclear weapons . ''
