Thursday 's military strikes against targets in Afghanistan and Sudan were aimed at stopping terrorists before they could carry out attacks with chemical weapons , part of a new Pentagon strategy that has been developing since 1994 .
Unlike just a few years ago , when the military focused on conventional operations such as the 1991 Gulf War , the Pentagon has shifted much of its attention to terrorists or rogue states capable of launching attacks against U.S. targets with nuclear , chemical or biological weapons .
`` We are in a different ballgame today , '' Joint Chiefs Chairman Gen. Henry Shelton said Thursday .
`` We 're going against a terrorist organization , and that calls for some different techniques . ''
Called `` counterproliferation , '' the new military strategy is about quick , incisive strikes that have a primary objective of taking out , or severely crippling , the ability of rogue states and terrorist groups to wreak havoc .
The Pentagon began its multibillion-dollar counterproliferation initiative to prevent nuclear , biological and chemical terrorism in late 1993 .
It was formally made part of defense planning and budgets the following year .
Defense Secretary William Cohen emphasized Thursday that the U.S. military action was not merely retaliation , but a pre-emptive strike to thwart additional terrorism that could involve chemical agents .
`` We have ... had convincing information that , for some time , the -LRB- Osama -RRB- bin Laden network has been actively seeking to acquire weapons of mass destruction , including chemical weapons , for use against U.S. citizens and our interests around the world , '' Cohen said .
Bin Laden is a Saudi millionaire accused by U.S. officials of being a major sponsor of terrorism , including the Aug. 7 embassy bombings in Africa .
`` Our target was terror , '' President Clinton declared .
`` Our mission was clear . ''
The Pentagon has already invested more than $ 20 billion on a wide range of technology improvements , sensors and weapons systems .
Walter Busbee , a retired brigadier general who serves as Cohen 's principal deputy for counterproliferation , described the goals in an interview : -- Bolster protection for American embassies and U.S. military sites overseas .
-- Prevent attacks on the American heartland from nuclear , chemical or biological weapons .
-- Provide the military the means to fight and win a conflict in which chemical , biological or nuclear weapons have been used .
-- Locate , attack and destroy such weapons before they can be used .
`` Counterproliferation is designed to give the president and national leadership options to deal with weapons of mass destruction if our good-faith -LRB- diplomatic -RRB- efforts ... and other initiatives fail to halt the spread , '' Busbee said .
In addition to suspected terrorist organization 's such as bin Laden 's , a number of countries -- including North Korea , Libya , Syria and Iran -- are known to possess or to be attempting to develop nuclear , biological or chemical agents and ballistic missiles .
The Pentagon anticipates spending an additional $ 30 billion on counterproliferation over the next five years , although the vast bulk of the money -- some $ 20 billion -- is earmarked for an array of ballistic missile defense programs such as the Boeing -led Airborne Laser System to destroy missiles after launch .
Thursday 's U.S. attacks appeared to be against relatively unprotected targets .
But the Pentagon faces a much more difficult and dangerous threat as it bolsters its overall counterproliferation strategy .
In the aftermath of the Gulf War , several hostile states have buried their critical nuclear , chemical and biological facilities deep underground , where they would be invulnerable to cruise missiles and other conventional weapons , experts warn .
Examples include the North Korean nuclear weapons complex at Yongbyon , where at least two nuclear devices have been built , and the Libyan chemical weapons complex at Tarhunah , both of which are buried under hundreds of feet of rock .
`` You are looking at a whole range of deeply buried facilities , '' said Dan Goure , a counterproliferation expert at the non-profit Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington , D.C. `` Many of them are built under mountains ... where stuff goes on may be thousands of meters under rock . ''
Goure said some experts doubt Yongbyon could be destroyed even by a tactical nuclear weapon .
`` Its doubtful you could do it with a nuclear -LRB- bomb -RRB- , even with an earth penetrator , '' he said .
A significant amount of counterproliferation money is being spent on sensors to detect such underground sites , intelligence systems to monitor and track the sites and weapons materials that may be moved from them .
And money is being spent on weapons to destroy both the facilities and the weapons materials , officials say .
As a fail-safe move , elite commandos from the U.S. Special Operations Command also have been tasked with developing weapons , technology and tactics to fight their way into hardened underground sites to destroy or seize weapons .
Among the programs under development : -- Ground sensors : A high-frequency research project aims at producing an active sensing system that can locate underground sites .
Other , mobile unmanned sensors are being built that can be covertly deployed near an underground facility to provide continuous surveillance .
-- Mobile sensors : A new generation of space -based sensors to detect nuclear detonations will improve U.S. ability to track nuclear proliferation .
Other sensors mounted on unmanned aerial vehicles , Navy ships and aircraft can detect trace elements from weapons materials being smuggled .
-- Earth -penetrating munitions : New conventional bombs and missile warheads are being designed that penetrate deeply underground before detonating to increase the destructive power of the weapon , and other warhead designs will incinerate chemical or biological agents instead of dispersing them in the blast .
-- Weapons : The Pentagon is exploring adapting the Army Tactical Missile System for use by the Navy and Marines as a weapon against underground facilities .
Other research is examining the reconfiguration of cruise missiles for this mission .
Counterproliferation also encompasses a wide variety of programs designed to encourage other nations to prevent proliferation of nuclear , chemical and biological materials and and critical technology .
Under the Cooperative Threat Reduction agreement with the countries of the former Soviet Union , the Pentagon and U.S. Energy Department have provided security courses and materials to safeguard such materials .
They also have assisted the centralized storage of such weapons in Russia , Busbee and other officials say .
Another high-profile element of counterproliferation is the Pentagon 's recent announcement that it will vaccinate all active-duty personnel against the biological agent anthrax .
No one doubts the urgency of the effort .
`` It certainly is a very significant danger we face , '' says retired Gen. John Shalikashvili , Shelton 's predecessor as Joint Chiefs chairman from 1993 to 1997 .
`` Despite the best arms-control efforts , the proliferation of both conventional weapons capable of producing mass casualties and ... chemical , biological and nuclear weapons will continue to expand , '' Shalikashvili said in an interview the day before the raids .
Experts warn there is no easy or simple formula that will guarantee the United States can prevent attacks by terrorist groups or rogue nations .
While the Pentagon Thursday demonstrated it had been able to compile data from eavesdropping satellites and other sources to identify the bin Laden terrorist sites , the CIA and other intelligence agencies are still recovering from a massive failure to detect the plans by India and Pakistan to detonate nuclear devices earlier this year .
Shalikashvili said the problem is not in obtaining data , but in fielding sufficient analysts who can identify threats from the material .
`` The data was all there , but the analysts were not devoted to watching it 24 hours a day , '' the retired general said .
CIA Director George Tenet in July announced a series of management reforms to beef up the agency 's counterproliferation center in the wake of the India - Pakistani blasts .
`` Proliferation is a new and very serious threat and not just to the military , '' Shalikashvili said .
`` This country needs to understand that the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ... is a threat to the whole country in peacetime , not just in wartime .
I 'm very concerned the country is not yet well organized to deal with a chemical or biological terrorist attack . ''
