`` Thinking the unthinkable '' is how the nuclear priesthood refers to it .
The Indian and Pakistani nuclear tests have reignited fierce debates over doctrine .
Do nuclear weapons make the world a more dangerous or a safer place ?
Can or should the United States try to prevent other nations from acquiring nuclear bombs ?
`` A profound test is under way of classical theories of deterrence and international relations , '' said Michael Krepon , president of the Henry L. Stimson Center , at a packed seminar on the subject in Washington this week .
From the moment the United States exploded the atomic bomb in 1945 , a small group of U.S. military intellectuals -- the `` thermonuclear Jesuits , '' as Fred Kaplan , in his 1983 book `` The Wizards of Armageddon , '' called them -- quickly understood that nuclear weapons made much of earlier U.S. military thinking obsolete .
Beginning at Yale University and later shifting to the Rand Corp. in Southern California , Bernard Brodie , a political scientist and naval strategist , invented nuclear strategy , the military establishment 's new catechism .
For the four years that the United States had a nuclear monopoly , it could afford the luxury of visionary ideas .
Shortly after the war , it proposed the abolition of nuclear arms , but that was vetoed at the United Nations by the Soviet Union .
In `` The Absolute Weapon , '' published in 1946 , Brodie wrote that the main function of nuclear weapons was deterring wars , not fighting them .
Nonetheless , he , Albert Wohlstetter , Herman Kahn , Thomas Schelling and others soon began systematically contemplating their use .
In the 1950s and early ' 60s , they coined the chilling phrases `` counterforce '' and `` second strike '' for the nuclear doctrines they devised .
One of the first public policy expressions of the new strategic thinking surfaced in 1957 , says Schelling , a professor of economics and public affairs at the University of Maryland .
That year , the Gaither Commission warned President Eisenhower that U.S. nuclear weapons were highly vulnerable to a surprise attack from Moscow .
Hence , the panel argued , the Soviets might be tempted to strike first in the hope of wiping out the U.S. bombers that could carry nuclear bombs to their targets .
To deter such an attack , the United States needed to make sure it could hit back with a second strike .
So the United States upgraded the Navy 's Polaris submarine program and replaced its Atlas and Titan missiles .
The new Minuteman missiles , smaller and solid fueled , were theoretically less susceptible to attack because they could be protected in underground silos and fired instantly .
Washington also began a national civil defense program that had children diving under their desks in `` duck and cover '' drills and what Schelling calls the `` fall-out shelter-in-the-backyard craze . ''
As President Kennedy 's Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara raised the contentious issue of how many nuclear weapons were enough to deter an attack .
In succession , he gave two different answers that led to the doctrine of deterrence that still dominates much of U.S. strategic thinking .
In a speech in Ann Arbor , Mich. , in 1962 , McNamara said that U.S. strategic forces should be aimed at Russian forces , not cities .
This counterforce doctrine ushered in the era of what was known as flexible nuclear response and the end of all-out destruction or `` massive retaliation . ''
Two years later he refined , or as some said , backed away from that doctrine , however , by urging President Lyndon Johnson to ensure that if the Russians launched a surprise counterforce strike , the United States would still have enough forces to destroy the Soviet Union 's military controls , 30 percent of its population and half its industrial base .
What he called `` mutual assured destruction , '' was quickly derided by critics by its acronym , MAD .
But for McNamara , it was the only hope of limiting the military 's insatiable appetite for more and more arms and of providing a stable balance of nuclear terror .
In the late 1960s and early ' 70s , says Spurgeon Keeny Jr. , the president of the Washington -based Arms Control Association , military analysts grew concerned not just about the arms race between the superpowers -LRB- known as vertical proliferation -RRB- but also about horizontal proliferation , the spread of nuclear weapons to nonnuclear countries .
To counter vertical proliferation , the superpowers signed the so-called SALT II agreement and the ABM Treaty in 1972 , which capped the growth of strategic missile launchers and effectively banned missile defense systems .
Defense systems were not only exorbitantly expensive but dangerous as well : if a country was sure that its own arsenal was shielded from attack , it might be tempted to take out its opponent 's .
To deal with the horizontal problem , the United States signed the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty in 1968 and imposed export controls on the sale of nuclear technology .
Under the treaty , nations pledged to forgo developing nuclear weapons in exchange for help with their civilian nuclear energy programs .
They also agreed to international inspection of their nuclear facilities .
Only five countries -- the United States , the Soviet Union , Britain , France and China , those that had already tested nuclear weapons -- were recognized under the treaty as declared nuclear weapons states .
When the Cold War ended , some arms controllers argued that even more progress could be made to curb both vertical and horizontal proliferation .
At first those hopes seemed justified , argued William Potter , director of the Monterey Institute 's Center for Nonproliferation Studies in California .
The Russians and Americans signed two more arms control treaties .
Meanwhile , by the time some 185 signers met to debate and approve the permanent extension of the Nonproliferation Treaty in 1995 , Belarus , Ukraine , and Kazakhstan had agreed to forgo nuclear weapons development and to remove nuclear warheads from their soil .
South Africa had given up its seven nuclear devices .
Argentina and Brazil had also relinquished a nuclear option , and international inspection standards of atomic sites were strengthened .
Potter says such accomplishments prompted a `` false sense of security . ''
What many analysts now fear is what Potter called an `` erosion of the basic consensus underlining the Nonproliferation and Test Ban Treaties : that having nuclear weapons does not enhance a country 's security . ''
Jayantha Dhanapala , a Sri Lankan disarmament expert and a senior U.N. official , argues that horizontal and vertical nuclear weapons policies are linked .
He cites the Canberra Commission on the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons , on which he served , which said in 1996 that stopping proliferation was `` inextricably linked to the continued possession of nuclear weapons by a handful of states . ''
As long as the nuclear powers resisted disarmament , as opposed to arms limitation , Dhanapala said , the perception that nuclear arms enhanced political status and security would remain what he called a source of fatal attraction .
He says all nuclear nations should disarm .
-LRB- MORE -RRB- nn Some theoreticians and policy makers agree that horizontal and vertical proliferation are linked but come to the opposite conclusion .
Kenneth Waltz , an American political scientist who teaches at Columbia , defends nuclear weapons as having deterred a nuclear war for more than 40 years .
He argues that their spread would also deter atomic conflicts between other countries -- if it works here , it will work elsewhere .
`` The hypocrisy of the Americans ' position is astonishing , '' he said .
`` We tell Pakistan and India , neither of which ever signed the NPT and therefore is violating no international commitment , that nuclear weapons are bad for them and that it 's bad to test , when we and the Russians have done far more tests over the years than we had any scientific or technical reason to do . ''
John Mearsheimer , a political science professor at the University of Chicago and a Waltz disciple , said that while he was not in favor of the Indian and Pakistani tests , `` I would argue that a conflict between them is less likely if they openly have nuclear weapons than without them . ''
Schelling says most military theorists and policy makers reject the Waltz - Mearsheimer thesis .
`` Even if the occurrence of conflict may be less likely , '' he said , `` the consequences of failure would be horrendous . ''
But equally unrealistic , he maintains , are calls for the nuclear powers to relinquish all nuclear weapons , as the Canberra Commission urged and as the writer Jonathan Schell advocates in a new book , `` The Gift of Time '' -LRB- 1998 -RRB- .
`` I live in the real world , '' said Schelling , who adds that countries under the U.S. nuclear umbrella have felt secure even without their own nuclear weapons .
Potter argues that the fatal flaw with respect to deterrence and proliferation theories is that both depend on rationality .
`` You assume cool and calculating determinations of how your interests are maximized , '' he said , `` which discounts the probability of miscalculation , accident or sheer panic . ''
Richard Betts , a political science professor at Columbia , echoes the consensus that emerged at the Washington meeting , that neither deterrence doctrine nor the treaties and agreements would be radically affected in the short run by India 's and Pakistan 's tests .
But Betts argued that the tests had highlighted the contradiction between the written U.S. pledge to disarm -LRB- in the Nonproliferation Treaty -RRB- and the longstanding commitment not to disarmament but to arms reductions .
The tests could also reopen long-simmering Cold War debates , like whether the United States now needs ballistic missile defenses in a proliferating world .
`` In some ways , the situation for India and Pakistan is comparable to where we were with the Russians in 1950 , '' he said .
Thus their choices could have profound implications for the future of arms control .
`` If they choose proliferation and the debates lead to international paralysis or inaction , '' he said , `` I would bet we 'll see some defections among those who have renounced nuclear weapons in the next few years . ''
