WASHINGTON --
Is the Cold War still over ?
Anyone wandering through the strategic attics of the United States and Russia might well wonder .
A decade after the collapse of the Soviet Union , the United States and Russia still have more than 14,000 nuclear warheads in their arsenals .
Together , these weapons could deliver the explosive equivalent of a ton of dynamite for every man , woman and child on earth .
The point of it all , analysts contend , is deterrence .
If each side understands the other 's capability , the reasoning goes , neither would see a nuclear attack on the other as a viable option .
Often criticized , the approach has helped to hold the two nuclear powers in check for half a century .
When President Clinton journeys to Moscow this week , though , he 'll take up the issue of how to reduce those weapons , in his first summit with Russia 's new president , Vladimir Putin .
Clinton , who leaves Washington on Monday for a week-long swing that will take him to Portugal , Germany , Russia and the Ukraine , is to meet with Putin in Moscow June 4 and 5 .
The two leaders have much to discuss : cooperation on peace efforts in the Middle East and the Balkans ; the upcoming summit between leaders of North Korea and South Korea ; terms of continuing multilateral aid for Russia 's beleaguered economy ; the safeguarding of Russia 's advanced weapons technology from states such as Iran ; and continuing fallout from Russia 's brutal war against Islamic separatists in the southern republic of Chechnya .
Topping the crowded agenda , however , will be a complex set of nuclear questions that have divided the former Cold War foes for decades .
`` This is an important summit , '' Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman John Warner , R - Va. , said at a hearing on the subject Tuesday .
`` I look upon this summit as a building block laying a foundation for the next president of the United States to build on , especially in the area of arms control . ''
Both Putin and Clinton say they hope to reduce their respective nuclear arsenals over time .
They differ , though , over how deeply to cut .
Under the terms of a pair of existing Strategic Arms Reduction Treaties -LRB- START I and START II -RRB- , both countries have agreed to cut the number of strategic warheads they have deployed -- perched atop intercontinental ballistic missiles , for example , loaded into submarines or tucked in the bomb bay of giant long-range bombers -- to between 3,000 and 3,500 by the year 2008 .
Clinton and Putin 's predecessor , former Russian President Boris Yeltsin , agreed three years ago in Helsinki to seek further reductions by that time , in cuts that would trim each country 's active warhead inventory to between 2,000 and 2,500 warheads .
The further cuts , though , are the subject of a third round of START talks on which Yeltsin and Clinton made little progress .
Those talks have only gotten underway in earnest , in fact , over the past several weeks , as Putin has put his new government into place .
Maintaining a nuclear arsenal is n't cheap .
It costs U.S. taxpayers anywhere between $ 20 billion and $ 33 billion a year , depending on how costs are allocated .
Russia still employs some 127,000 physicists , nuclear technicians and weapons experts to maintain its strategic arsenal , though thousands of them regularly go without pay .
The government is , by some estimates , US$ 400 million in arrears to these skilled workers , and the country 's poor economy makes a near-term solution improbable .
With that in mind , the Russians have proposed cutting their deployed warheads to 1,500 .
Clinton 's opening position is that re , '' Defense Department undersecretary for policy , Walter Slocombe , told Warner 's committee .
`` They are also a guarantee of our security commitment to our allies , and a disincentive to those who would contemplate developing , acquiring or using their own nuclear weapons . ''
The United States and Russia are even further apart on a controversial U.S. proposal to set up a defensive shield against incoming missiles .
Clinton is weighing a system that would rely on roughly 100 interceptor missiles , based in Alaska , on the theory that such a system could have a strong likelihood of knocking down a missile coming in across the Pacific Ocean or over the North Pole .
If a planned July test goes well , Pentagon officials will present Clinton with cost estimates -- currently they range anywhere from $ 20 billion to $ 60 billion -- and strategic analysis for the system .
It could be September before Clinton gets the Pentagon 's recommendations .
The Pentagon claims such a national missile defense system would be built not to defend against a Russian missile launch , but rather as protection from attacks by so-called rogue states , such as North Korea , Iran or Iraq .
All three are believed to be well along in their effort to acquire nuclear weapons .
`` This is not a system that is designed to deal with the Russian strategic deterrence , '' Deputy Defense Secretary Rudy De Leon told Pentagon reporters earlier this month .
`` It is designed to be a limited defense , largely against the potential proliferation of missile technologies in the next decade and beyond . ''
Moscow , though , is troubled by the proposal .
The Russian government fears that such a system would negate at least some of the deterrent effect of its own nuclear arsenal , forcing Russia to compensate somehow -- likely by deploying more weapons than it would otherwise .
`` It reminds them of Star Wars , '' a White House official said , referring to the space -based laser defensive shield President Reagan proposed , and a Democratic Congress killed , during the 1980s .
Preventing aggressive defense systems from further fueling the Cold War arms race was the aim of the Anti - Ballistic Missile -LRB- ABM -RRB- treaty negotiated with the Soviet Union by President Nixon in 1972 .
The treaty has been amended since then , but essentially it restricts the ability of either side to deploy more than a limited number of defensive missiles .
The Russians contend , and the White House agrees , that the ABM prohibits the United States from building a national missile defense system .
Clinton and Yeltsin agreed last summer , though , at the Group of Eight meeting in Cologne , Germany , to take up possible amendments meant to `` strengthen the treaty , to enhance its viability and effectiveness in the future , '' according to a joint statement the two leaders signed .
Clinton hopes Putin will agree to amend the ABM treaty such that it would allow a limited national missile defense system , but Putin 's government has yet to warm to the idea .
The Cologne agreement also called for moving forward with START III talks , in effect packaging U.S. hopes for ABM treaty modifications with Russia 's plea for further cuts in deployed warheads .
It 's by no means clear that Clinton will be able to complete those complicated negotiations before he leaves office in January .
White House officials have been especially careful not to predict any breakthroughs for this summit .
Putin and Clinton are scheduled to meet at least three more times this year , and U.S. offrd on difficult nuclear arms issues .
`` This is the first face-to-face meeting with Putin , this is a tough issue , and we 've been slogging it out for months now , '' one White House official said on background .
Still , this official said , `` There 's some hope that all of this will fall together , '' before Clinton leaves office .
The summit `` is not the end of the process , '' this official said , `` but the beginning . ''
-LRB- Bob Deans ' E -mail address is : bobdeans -LRB- at -RRB- coxnews.com -RRB- For more information : www.state.gov www.defenselink.mil ENDIT
