WHITEMAN AIR FORCE BASE , Mo. --
To grasp how desperately Russia wants to haggle for ever lower limits on nuclear weapons , it helps to think of the B -2 stealth bomber .
A single jet runs $ 2 billion a copy .
The U.S. Air Force has 17 parked here with four more in the shop for upkeep .
The cost of just three such bombers -- forget about spending millions more to keep them flying -- would wipe out an entire year of Russian defense spending .
Meantime , the land -based missiles that anchor Russia 's nuclear capabilities are fast corroding in their silos , most of their submarines are moored in port , and the country has commissioned but one new heavy bomber in eight years .
No wonder , then , that with its economy in ruin and largely unable to crank up a rebuilt nuclear war machine , Russia wants a treaty that significantly lowers each side 's atomic warheads .
`` In the past the U.S. and Soviet Union were talking as equals , '' said Igor Khripunov , a former Soviet arms control negotiator .
`` Now it 's like a heavyweight taking on a lightweight . ''
Yet most analysts who study the complex , high-stakes world of nuclear arms see little chance of President Clinton and new Russian President Vladimir Putin crafting an arms control bargain when they meet in Moscow today and tomorrow .
Even in the post- Cold War world order , nuclear arms pacts pose vexing problems that have grown only more knotty .
Consider the stakes .
The Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty , or START II , was ratified only months ago by the Russian Legislature and limits each side to 3,000 to 3,500 nuclear warheads .
The last of the Minuteman II missiles at Whiteman Air Force Base , near Knob Noster , were removed by the end of 1995 as part of the deal .
Terms agreed to by Clinton and former Russian President Boris Yeltsin in 1997 for the next phase , START III , would bring those numbers down to 2,000 to 2,500 .
Cost -conscious Russia has since said it wants to drop that to 1,500 warheads each .
Further , the Russians suggest that if they do not win that argument , they will be forced to keep some of their multiple-warhead land -based missiles active -- a violation of START II .
The Pentagon , meantime , has said that it cannot go below 2,000 warheads and still justify the expense of keeping its , , and bomber-launched nuclear weapon systems going .
All the while , Americans are at odds with themselves over a missile defense .
Clinton and likely Democratic presidential nominee Al Gore have lined up tentatively behind a limited missile defense , assuming it can be proved to work .
George W. Bush , the Texas governor headed toward the Republican presidential nomination , has spoken of adopting a more robust national defense system .
Both approaches would mean a break from the 1972 Anti - Ballistic Missile Treaty that bans deployment .
And both alarm the Russians , and others , because they would depart from an edgy balance that has existed since almost the dawn of the atomic age -- the knowledge that an attack by one country would leave both destroyed .
`` Now we would wind up with a shield and a sword , '' said Martin Goldstein , a one-time foreign affairs specialist with the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency .
`` They would end up with only a sword . ''
There is some talk in arms control circles of a remote chance at a bargain .
Washington could agree to fewer nuclear warheads if the Russians would permit an American missile shield .
The Pentagon could be appeased with accounting tricks that cloak the real numbers of warheads in the American arsenal .
Under START I , for instance , a bomber was counted as a single warhead even though it carried more .
Under START II , planes like the B -2 are accurately counted for the 16 nuclear weapons they carry .
A revision to START III might go back to the old accounting system .
The Russians , eager to save money , could let their nuclear cache shrink and still save face .
For Putin , that sort of bargain would mean badly needed savings on defense spending and send a message to the world that his regime will be reasonable and Russia worthy of foreign investment .
But it could sour relations with his military , 85 percent of which voted for him .
`` The young reformers in his government do n't worry much about ABM , '' said David Johnson , a senior analyst and publisher of a newsletter on Russia for the Center for Defense Information .
`` The military would be much more upset . ''
And Putin already unsettled his generals by recently announcing a bruising 25 percent cut in defense spending .
Clinton might not be in any better position .
His time in office is now measured in mere months .
The Republican majority in Congress is not likely to go along .
Sen. Jesse Helms , chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee , said any such suggestion would arrive at Capitol Hill `` dead on arrival . ''
Any prospect of a missile defense is not , however , just a two-way deal with the Russians .
The Chinese have already made clear their worries about the upper hand America could gain through a missile defense , and experts say sharing the technology with their Russian neighbor only figures to crank up anxiety in Beijing .
For now , the strategic response for a country like China would be to work toward building so many intercontinental ballistic missiles that it could overwhelm such a shield .
That , in turn , could scare India down the same path , which could tempt the Pakistanis to pick up their pace in the arms race .
And so on .
`` If a deal were to be cut , it would have ramifications for the global effort on nuclear arms control , '' said Todd Perry , a senior analyst on arms control for the Union of Concerned Scientists .
Some smaller things are expected from the conference .
The presidents will probably sign an already drafted agreement on improvements in early warning systems -- each country promising to tell the other when it thinks a nuclear missile has been fired .
There is also a tentative deal on Americans helping Russians dispose of weapons-grade plutonium , a measure designed to choke the black market for nuclear bomb parts .
But the larger picture , most arms control analysts agree , does not offer much chance of a significant deal .
Clinton could create a political problem for Gore by making a controversial pact in Moscow .
Putin could undercut his tenuous coalition in Russia by further angering the Russian military .
The easiest route for both men , said nuclear arms scholar Valerie Hudson , is to do very little .
`` Clinton 's a lame duck , and Putin does n't know that the Americans would follow through on any deal made by Clinton , '' said the Brigham Young University professor .
`` Putin also has an interest in looking tough . ''
