MOSCOW --
Just before Gennady Lyakhin captained the Kursk to sea on its maiden voyage , he turned to a television camera and said his vessel , one of Russia 's most modern and fearsome submarines , was proof , and a potent symbol , that Russia still had the military might to defend its interests around the world .
That was 1995 .
Now , barring a miracle , Lyakhin lies dead in the wreckage of his sub at the bottom of the icy waters of the Barents Seas , along with the rest of his 118-member crew .
And the Kursk has become a symbol of something entirely different : of Russia 's inability to keep its nuclear Navy maintained and its crews trained , and of the dangers this implies for the rest of the rusting fleet of `` floating Chernobyls '' that make up the bulk of the country 's submarine force .
The sinking of the Kursk is not the first submarine disaster for the former Soviet Union ; it is the fifth in the past 20 years .
But it is the first to unfold in real time .
The loss of the sub , and the futile week of efforts to save the crew , have given the world , as well as ordinary Russians , an unflattering glimpse at the cancers eating away at Russia 's once proud military : lack of funding and resources , confusion and discord among commanders , general disregard for the safety and well-being of service personnel , and evidence everywhere of long-term decay .
`` The Kursk tragedy and the rescue operation show the true current state of the Russian Navy , '' said Admiral Georgy Kostev , one of Russia 's leading authorities on submarines , last week .
The unexplained loss of a submarine called `` unsinkable '' by its designers has dealt a serious blow to President Vladimir V. Putin 's plans to make the Navy the mainstay of Moscow 's bid to reclaim great power status .
It 's a goal embodied in a huge billboard that has popped up on Moscow 's streets , featuring a picture of a Russian missile cruiser , with the huge slogan `` Naval Might for Russia 's Glory . ''
If the rescue work , as is all but certain , ends up confirming the deaths of 118 crew members , the Kursk disaster would be the largest peacetime loss for the Russian Navy .
The Kursk tragedy could have been even worse if the sub had been carrying nuclear weapons , or if its reactor had begun leaking radiation .
What worries some analysts most is the possibility that the Kursk disaster could repeat itself .
The Kola Peninsula , home of the Northern Fleet where the Kursk was based , has 270 military and civilian nuclear reactors on its soil , the largest concentration in the world .
It is home to about 50 active nuclear submarines and 90 that have been decommissioned .
Of these decommissioned vessels , 35 still contain nuclear reactors or fuel , and therefore cannot simply be scrapped , said Alexei Yablokov , a former adviser on ecological issues to former president Boris N. Yeltsin .
Russia has no money and inadequate facilities to transfer or store the radioactive fuel .
The result is a growing backlog of poorly stored nuclear waste , much of it afloat on docked submarines that need constant maintenance .
`` These vessels are a catastrophe waiting to happen , they are floating Chernobyls , '' Yablokov said .
`` They require constant cooling , or else there is the possibility of an explosion . ''
Once , when the local utility turned off the electricity serving one of the decommissioned boats , the diesel-fueled backup pumps were out of fuel .
`` An admiral told me later we were an hour or so away from a meltdown , '' Yablokov said .
`` Depending on the wind , that could send fallout as far as Denmark . ''
Or as near as Murmansk , a city of 500,000 next to the main naval base .
Murmansk has had its share of close calls in recent years : In May , 1998 , radio stations warned people to take iodine tablets after a fire on a Delta -class ballistic missile submarine set off fears of nuclear fallout .
After a brief period of openness in the early 1990s , the military has clamped the lid of secrecy over the nuclear peril on the Kola Penninsula .
Anyone who tries to raise the nuclear waste problem is persecuted , like Alexander Nikitin , a former Navy captain who spent two years in prison on treason charges before a court acquitted him this year .
`` The leadership still prefers secrecy to safety , unfortunately for the sailors , and probably unfortunately for society , '' said Joshua Handler , a doctoral student at Princeton University , who is a specialist on the Russian nuclear fleet .
Have the near catastrophes caused the Navy to take more safety precautions to prevent accidents ?
The Kursk disaster indicates that the answer is no .
Several reports said last week that the submarine left shore without vital batteries that would power backup air-purifying and light systems in an emergency .
One former commander of Russia 's Navy , Eduard Baltin , said last week that he had asked why the Navy had not sent deep-sea divers , who can operate at 350 feet , to investigate the damage , try to set up communications with the submarine , and possibly pass supplies and oxygen to any survivors .
Baltin said he had found out that the Navy still had a deep-sea diving unit , but all training and funding had stopped , and all the qualified divers had left for better-paying jobs .
Kostev said Russia once had two rescue submarines similar to the one the British have , but the minisubs were decommissioned in 1995 .
In their absence , less capable bathyscapes with short-lived batteries and antiquated diving bells , none of which could fight the strong undersea currents , wasted three days trying to latch onto the Kursk 's escape hatch .
Only on Wednesday did Russia decide to call in a British minisub and a Norwegian team of deep-sea divers for assistance .
`` As for the rescue operation , it is being conducted as if they do n't want to save the crew , but instead get rid of any loose ends in the ocean , '' Kostev said last week .
All of Russia 's armed services have been in crisis since the 1991 Soviet breakup , especially after two costly campaigns in the breakaway republic of Chechnya .
But the Navy has been hit worst of all .
Russia 's total annual defense budget is less than $ 5 billion , a fraction of what it was 10 years ago , and the Navy 's share has shrunk to less than 15 percent .
The Navy can barely pay for food for sailors and officers ' wages , to say nothing of investing in new vessels , weapons , training , and maintenance .
The number of active nuclear-powered submarines , considered the elite force of the Russian Navy , has shrunk from more than 250 during the Cold War to 60 today .
Patrols have been cut by 70 percent .
`` The main reason we have probably not seen more of these horrendous accidents since the situation has deteriorated is because they have less subs and they are operating less , '' said Handler at Princeton .
The massive 500-foot vessels of the Kursk class , known as Oscar -2 by NATO and Antei by the Russians , were considered Russia 's best attack submarines , with enough armor to survive a direct torpedo hit and the firepower to destroy an entire US aircraft-carrier group in one attack .
But in the post- Cold War world , taking on the US Navy is not a top priority for Russia , and even the Oscar -2 boats have been neglected .
Of the seven remaining Oscar -2 submarines , three are laid-up , waiting to be scrapped .
Defense analysts say one more Oscar -2 is in construction , though it is unclear whether it will ever be finished .
Some reports last week suggested the Kursk had been at sea only twice in five years .
Since the vessel had three rotating crews , that likely meant that some crew members on board last weekend had no prior experience at sea .
Alexander Pikayev , a specialist on nuclear forces at the Carnegie Center in Moscow , said repairs to the boat had been delayed because of funding problems ; instead , a vital repair was taken on by sailors .
`` The inactivity of the fleet and the loss of technical and human resources of the past few years undeniably helped the accident happen , '' Pikayev said .
Putin also may bear some responsibility .
Just a day before the Kursk sank , on Aug. 11 , He told his Security Council that it was time to reform a military in which `` pilots do n't fly , and sailors barely go to sea . ''
To change this , Putin had ordered massive exercises of the kind the Northern Fleet had not seen since the Cold War .
The idea was to ready the fleet for a voyage to the Mediterranean this fall , which would show the world that Russia still had a presence on the high seas .
The problem , defense analysts like Pikayev said , is that officers and crews who had spent most of the decade on shore no longer had the training or discipline to operate their complex vessels .
`` As the Americans say , people get rusty more quickly than boats , '' Pikayev said .
`` This sharp change in the routine , taking these ships with poor repairs , undisciplined crews , who have lost many of their skills ; this is a recipe for something to go wrong . ''
On Aug. 11 , the Security Council decided to make deep cuts in Russia 's strategic nuclear arsenal in order to fund other branches of the military , and to shift the focus of Russia 's nuclear deterrent to the Navy , a move the Kursk disaster could force the Kremlin to reconsider .
`` How long can we get by on the enthusiasm of our men , '' Putin asked rhetorically during the meeting .
The next day he got his answer .
