Had John Holland kept his balance the submarine might have remained a useless military curiosity instead of becoming the ship that revolutionized naval warfare .
For 400 years before his fateful spill on an icy Boston street , a score of inventors had unsuccessfully tried to perfect a vessel that could attack from beneath the waves .
Their designs took shape in wood , iron , steel and brass , and were powered by every conceivable prime mover , from oars and hand cranks , to boilers and batteries , and internal combustion engines .
Yet no one could make the idea work .
No one , that is , until Holland .
During his lengthy recuperation from a broken leg the new Irish immigrant , a failed school teacher without a lick of formal technical training , managed to make the pieces fit .
`` Occasionally in this unfair life the best man wins , '' observes British submarine historian Richard Compton - Hall .
`` Holland had none of the important political and commercial contacts .
He complained that submarine designs were hidden to prevent competition from other inventors .
But this is exactly why Holland got it right .
He started with an open mind . ''
One hundred years ago this fall , on Oct. 12 , 1900 , the U.S. Navy deployed the product of that open mind , the USS Holland .
While this fishy-looking , fume-belching boat would never fire a shot in anger , it would reshape the fate of nations more completely than any war .
Attacks by a German submarine on the passenger liner Lusitania drew an isolationist America into the trenches of World War I. By the time global hostilities ceased at the end of World War II , American submarines so completely dominated the Pacific Rim that the Japanese had virtually no ships left to sink .
And if any one weapon can be said to have won the Cold War , it was clearly the submarine .
Deep -diving `` boomers '' carried more than half of the nuclear arsenal .
Fast attack submarines trailed Soviet missile carriers and performed vital intelligence functions , such as tapping deep-sea cables carrying secret Soviet military messages .
PIG BOATS The submarines that quickly gave America mastery of the deep were descendants of the first generation of boats that followed the Holland .
Longer and sleeker , they were powered by increasingly reliable diesel engines .
During World War I the U.S. Navy separated submersibles into two groups according to mission .
N -class boats chiefly patrolled America 's coasts and harbors .
, , and most E -class boats patrolled the open seas from bases in the Azores and Bantry Bay in Ireland .
Conditions aboard these boats were n't very different from living in a minivan with a dozen of your closest friends .
The squalor below deck earned these early submarines the nickname `` pig boats . ''
Although no sinkings would be attributed to U.S. submarines during World War I , the boats are credited with helping to keep open the sea lanes along the European coast and critical maritime approaches to the British Isles .
By the time the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor , the pig boat had undergone a technological transformation .
With the Salmon class the Navy had at last succeeded in building a submarine with the speed and range necessary to accompany its surface fleet .
The era of the `` fleet '' submarine was born , and with it a powerful new weapon .
Pound for pound submarines would prove themselves the most deadly weapon ever set to sea .
`` In spite of a hesitant beginning due to the Pearl Harbor surprise and difficulties with defective torpedoes , the submarine force destroyed 1,314 enemy ships for 5.3 million tons , which translated into 55 percent of all enemy ships lost , '' says Gary Weir of the U.S. Naval Historical Center in Washington .
Victory came at a high price .
Of the 16,000 submariners who put to sea , 375 officers and 3,131 enlisted men remain on `` eternal patrol . ''
A TRUE SUBMARINE In the minds of many naval historians , the USS Nautilus was the first true submarine .
Through World War II , submarines actually spent most of their time on the surface where their diesel engines could freely gulp the air and spin propellers and the generators that charged the batteries used for underwater operations .
The nuclear reactor changed everything .
Steam was generated by nuclear fission , which required neither air nor a combustible fuel source .
`` Producing the Nautilus became the most important goal for reasons of national security , mutual profit and the sheer challenge of harnessing the power of the atom to drive an American warship , '' says Weir .
This technology found its first home in the Nautilus , the first ship truly at home in the ocean deep .
About the same time the Navy was experimenting with nuclear propulsion , it was also re-evaluating the basic formula for submarine hull design .
Researchers at the Navy 's David Taylor Model Basin in Carderock , Md. , reached the same conclusion Holland had intuitively grasped from the start : Submarines should look like fish .
This new thinking debuted with the USS Albacore .
A purely experimental submarine , the vessel set a series of speed records , and then underwent a series of rebuilds to test various hull designs and counterrotating propellers .
The arrival of a true submarine , as opposed to a submersible , coincided with a sea change in naval strategy .
In the early 1950s , fears of provoking the Soviet Union into an all-out war shifted the strategic emphasis of submarines toward defense and antisubmarine warfare .
This required boats that could dive deeper , run quieter and detect Soviet vessels without revealing their presence .
`` Skipjack represented the consummation of a marriage between nuclear power and the Albacore hull , '' says Weir .
Since then every nuclear submarine has followed the same design .
BOOMERS AND HUNTERS As the Cold War continued submarine design branched along two paths : missile carriers , or `` boomers , '' and attack submarines .
After a Polaris missile was successfully launched from the USS George Washington in 1960 , it became clear that submarines were the ideal launch pads for ballistic missiles to check Soviet aggression .
By the end of the Cold War , 54 percent of America 's nuclear arsenal traveled in Ohio class submarines .
The backbone of the attack fleet consists of 62 Los Angeles class submarines , which carry Mk 48 torpedoes and Tomahawk cruise missiles .
During Operation Allied Force in Kosovo , one in four cruise missiles launched against a Serbian target was fired from a submarine .
Initially , these deadly hunters were to be replaced by Seawolf class boats , but with the demise of the Soviet Union this seems unlikely .
The Navy now plans for only three Seawolf class boats .
FUTURE SUBMARINES The Navy 's next submarine , the Virginia class , is scheduled to launch in 2004 .
It will be the first submarine that is optimized for attacking targets on both land and sea .
Below deck the USS Virginia will be configured to rapidly shift from torpedoes to cruise missiles .
An oversize nine-man airlock will put SEAL teams into the thick of the action in hours .
With the price of submarines hovering at about the $ 2 billion mark , money has become an issue .
To cut cost the Virginia class has been designed entirely on a computer and will be built of modular segments .
`` The USS Virginia will achieve the right balance of combat capability and affordability , '' says a Navy spokesman .
Beyond the Virginia class , both the definition of missions and the shape of submarines themselves become murky .
Strategists believe future naval engagements will move from the deep ocean into the `` littorals , '' the shallow waters near shore .
Targets are as likely to be on land as at sea .
The most imaginative designs envision underwater mother ships that launch SEAL teams , much as aircraft carriers launch jet fighters .
-- EDITOR : Visit The New York Times Syndicate Web site at http : //www.nytimes.com/syndicate for more information on the POPULAR MECHANICS NEWS SERVICE and other features .
NONSUBSCRIBERS : To publish a `` separate-buy '' feature article , it must be purchased .
Please contact one of these sales representatives : --U.S .
and Canada : DEBRA WEYDERT in New Jersey at 1-732-390-4480 ; fax , 732-390-4697 .
--Europe and Asia : KARL HORWITZ in Paris at 47-42-17-11 ; fax , 47-42-80-44 or 47-42-18-81 ; telex , 282-942 .
--Latin America : ANA PENA in New York , 212-499-3333 ; fax , 212-499-3382 .
