MONTEREY , Calif. --
Russia and its navy are justifiably facing criticism for the handling of the Kursk submarine disaster .
But simply focusing on the problems in Russia misses a central point : the inherent costs and risks of all nuclear submarines .
Earlier this month , the U.S. Navy uncovered faulty welding in its newest Seawolf vessel , meaning that this already far over-budget submarine must now be returned to the manufacturer for repairs .
It is also requesting more funds for other new submarines .
Yet at the same time , news surfaced about the Navy 's plans to mothball one of its two rescue submarines for budget reasons .
Since nuclear reactors and nuclear weapons first went to sea in the 1950s , submarine accidents have killed more than 700 sailors from the United States and the Soviet Union -LRB- and now , Russia -RRB- alone .
The United States lost two nuclear submarines and their crews in the 1960s .
It has also been involved in as many as a dozen nuclear submarine collisions with Soviet and Russian vessels .
As recently as March 1998 , two American nuclear submarines collided in an exercise off the coast of Long Island .
Russia 's record is far worse .
Besides the Kursk , Russia has lost four submarines with either nuclear weapons or reactors aboard -LRB- in 1968 , 1970 , 1986 and 1989 -RRB- .
Fires , collisions with military and civilian vessels and dangerous reactor incidents both at sea and during refueling operations at dock have caused numerous preventable deaths .
Now Brazil is moving forward with plans to develop its first nuclear attack submarine .
India is cooperating with Russia in developing a submarine reactor , while Pakistan is sending feelers to France about expanding its purchases of conventional Agosta -class submarines , which could be fitted with nuclear weapons .
China , with Russian help , is seeking to expand its small nuclear fleet .
These nations continue to believe that nuclear submarines offer security and prestige .
Yet , as the Russian case indicates , developing nuclear submarines involves significant long-term costs .
These include expenses for managing spent fuel , eliminating liquid radioactive waste and disposing of used reactor compartments .
Russia has already caused serious damage to the environment near many of its navy ports and will eventually spend several billion dollars on the clean-up , decommissioning and dismantling of its nuclear fleet .
Yet despite the serious environmental and safety threats posed by nuclear submarines , there is currently no international effort to ban their spread .
The nuclear Non - Proliferation Treaty includes no clause prohibiting the sale of either nuclear submarines or the highly enriched uranium fuel they run on .
An important first step toward preventing a future catastrophe at sea would be for the current nuclear submarine-producing states to agree to a ban on their sale or transfer , along with similar bans regarding propulsion technology .
Such self-restraint would raise the cost of building nuclear submarines and act as a deterrent .
A second step would be for the nuclear navies of the world to discuss a `` rules of the road '' agreement to facilitate the exchange of information in the case of future accidents .
Such an accord would help prevent submarine collisions from leading to inadvertent war and accidents from causing avoidable deaths .
A final step would be to include the enriched uranium fuel used in submarines in negotiations toward a global treaty to ban the production of fissile materials .
Existing proposals make no mention of the submarine fuel .
The Kursk incident should spur changes in Russia 's nuclear navy .
But this will not alleviate the international dangers caused by submarine collisions , accidents and transfers of technology .
New global initiatives are needed to improve the safety of the seas .
-LRB- James Clay Moltz is associate director of the Center for Nonproliferation Studies at the Monterey Institute of International Studies . -RRB-
-- EDITORS : Visit The New York Times Syndicate Web site at http : //www.nytimes.com/syndicate for more information on OPED articles and other features .
NONSUBSCRIBERS : To publish a ` separate-buy ' feature article , it must be purchased .
Please contact one of these sales representatives : --U.S .
and Canada : DEBRA WEYDERT in New Jersey at 1-732-390-4480 ; fax , 732-390-4697 .
--Europe and Asia : KARL HORWITZ in Paris at 47-42-17-11 ; fax , 47-42-80-44 or 47-42-18-81 ; telex , 282-942 .
--Latin America : ANA PENA in New York , 212-499-3333 ; fax , 212-499-3382 .
