China 's first Russian -built guided-missile destroyer is expected to arrive in the East China Sea as early as this week , enhancing Beijing 's ability to threaten American aircraft carriers in any future encounters over Taiwan .
Within weeks of the Sovremenny -class destroyer 's arrival , Russia is expected to deliver the ship 's most formidable weapon , Sunburn antiship missiles specifically designed to penetrate American carrier battle group defenses .
The sea-skimming supersonic missiles , in the version employed by the Russians , can carry both nuclear and conventional warheads .
Nonproliferation conventions and Russia 's own strategic interests make it unlikely that the missiles will be delivered with nuclear warheads .
But Russia could provide , or China could develop , the technology that would enable the missiles to deliver a Chinese nuclear warhead .
The ship , expected to join China 's East Sea Fleet based in Ningbo , arrives at a time of heightened tension in the narrow strait separating the mainland from Taiwan , which Beijing has long considered a breakaway province .
Taiwan holds presidential elections next month and during the last elections , in 1996 , Beijing fired missiles into the sea near the island .
The United States responded by sending two aircraft carrier groups to the area , infuriating Beijing and embarrassing its military leaders .
Even with conventional warheads , China 's new missile-armed destroyers , together with four recently purchased Kilo -class submarines from Russia will raise the threshold for any future American intervention in the region , military analysts say .
`` These two systems , in particular , are ones that give us pause and make us realize that we are in fact going in harm 's way , '' says Eric McVadon , a retired rear admiral who was a defense and naval attache in Beijing and is now a consultant on East Asian security affairs .
`` That 's something the Chinese did n't possess before . ''
China has built its own guided-missile destroyers , but they are considered less threatening than the Sunburn -equipped destroyers from Russia .
China purchased two of the Russian ships last year and is believed to be negotiating the purchase of at least two more .
`` This is a generational leap for China into a much more advanced type of surface weaponry , '' said James Lilley , a former American ambassador to China and now a fellow at the conservative American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research in Washington .
Official American reaction to the ships ' arrival has been muted .
`` The U.S. military is adequately prepared '' to deal with any threat posed by the destroyers , a Pentagon spokesman , Lt. Cmdr .
Terry Southerland said this week .
He said there has been no decision on Taiwan 's request to buy American Aegis destroyers as a countermove to the Chinese purchases .
And military analysts say it could take China years of training before its navy can handle such a sophisticated ship in an actual conflict .
One analyst said China `` is trying to make us sweat ... but one ship does not a Navy make . ''
Congress is currently considering expanded military ties with Taiwan .
Last week the House passed the Taiwan Security Enhancement Act , which would increase coordination between U.S. and Taiwan forces and provide more American training of Taiwan 's military officers .
The Senate has yet to vote on the bill , which the Clinton administration has threatened to veto if it does pass .
American military technology could find and sink the new Chinese destroyers in a matter of hours of any conflict .
But the presence of the ships and their missiles in the Taiwan theater complicates the delicate calculus of cross-straits relations , the most volatile flashpoint in East Asia .
Ever since the Chinese Nationalist Army retreated to Taiwan in 1949 , Beijing has threatened to occupy the island by force if its government declares independence from the mainland .
Tensions increased last summer after Taiwan 's president , Lee Teng -hui , declared that talks between his government and the mainland government should be on a `` state-to-state basis , '' affording Taipei diplomatic parity with Beijing .
So far China has lacked the ability to carry out its threat of invasion -- dubbed by skeptics `` the million-man swim '' -- largely because of Taiwan 's superior air force and the backing of the U.S. 7th Fleet .
Instead , Beijing has elected to threaten and intimidate Taipei with a formidable , and steadily increasing , arsenal of short-range ballistic missiles such as those used in 1996 .
Under the 1979 Taiwan Relations Act , the United States is obligated to help Taiwan defend itself from a mainland attack -- although in a 1982 joint communique with Beijing , Washington pledged not to increase the quantity or quality of arms sold to Taiwan .
The commitment to Taiwan 's defense was reinforced last year when a senior State Department official told a group of Chinese businessmen that a mainland attack on Taiwan would be `` disastrous for U.S. - China relations , and could , no doubt , pit us in an actual war . ''
Those comments were intended as a warning to Beijing , American officials say .
But China 's new destroyers and their Sunburn missiles , with a range of up to 65 miles , will alter the equation .
The U.S. Navy currently has limited defense against the missile , which Russia designed in the 1980s to sink Arleigh Burke -class Aegis destroyers guarding American carrier groups or to hit the carriers themselves .
The radar-guided missiles can deliver a 200-kiloton nuclear warhead to a target beyond the horizon in about two minutes .
Even one of its conventional warheads could sink a cruiser or disable a carrier , depending on where it hits , military analysts say .
China 's purchase of the destroyer and its missiles is part of an emerging pattern of procurement in the wake of warming relations with Russia .
With the United States and much of Europe refusing to supply China with advanced weapons , Russia and Israel have been the country 's primary options .
Israel has helped China with the avionics for a fighter aircraft it is developing .
But Russia , with a sophisticated arsenal and weakened economy , has been a more willing supplier .
Russia has sold China four quiet Kilo -class submarines , which carry `` wake-homing '' torpedoes designed to detonate beneath a ship 's keel .
The torpedoes are difficult to detect because they approach the ship from the rear where their sound is masked by the noise of the ship 's propellers .
And Russia is helping China assemble Russian Sukhoi Su -27 fighters .
Many American politicians , military officials and analysts deride these purchases , saying China is assembling a `` junkyard army , '' cobbled together piecemeal from out-of-date , cast-off weaponry that poses little threat to the United States or its allies .
And many of the weapons systems China has purchased require extensive training and sophisticated electronics and software to be used effectively .
The People 's Liberation Army has not demonstrated prowess in mastering such technology .
But other American analysts see a sinister logic to the procurement program , suggesting that the weapons purchases meet specific tactical needs within broader strategic goals -- the ability to challenge American dominance in the Taiwan Strait , for example , or to protect its claims in the resource-rich South China Sea .
Some warn further that the incremental arms build-up represents the early stages of a broader armament intended to prepare China for potential conflict with the United States or to allow the country to eventually supplant the United States as the leading military power in the Asia - Pacific region .
China says it has no interest in projecting military force beyond its borders , arguing that it wants to maintain regional stability and focus on its own economic development .
And , clearly , it would take decades to develop the integrated armed forces necessary to challenge American dominance in the region .
But Beijing considers Taiwan a domestic , not regional , issue .
`` China sees the ` Taiwan problem ' as a wholly internal issue -- not a matter of an aggressive action against another country , '' said McVadon , the former military attache .
`` And , of course , enormously large and economically dynamic China believes it has a rightful place as a key part of the East Asian security architecture .
`` The trick , '' he said , `` is to find a way to preserve U.S. interests in Asia and yet accommodate China as an emerging military and economic power in the region and the world . ''
