MOSCOW , April 22 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Russian President - Elect Vladimir Putin approved the country 's new military doctrine Saturday .
Putin 's decree , which endorses the doctrine and takes effect from its moment of publication , simultaneously rescinds a decree by former President Boris Yeltsin to approve the previous doctrine .
The Russian Security Council , the top national security agency , approved the final text of the new doctrine Friday .
At a council meeting in the Kremlin , Security Council secretary Sergei Ivanov stressed the doctrine is defensive and its main purposes are deterrence and the preservation of peace .
At the same time , it firmly advocates Russia 's interests in the military sphere , he said , and `` the text of the military doctrine meets Russia 's national interests . ''
Earlier , the Security Council approved a draft of the new military doctrine on February 4 , which incorporates changes over the past few years in the North Caucasus regions and in NATO policies .
The council gave all of the key state organizations and departments two months to finalize the draft military doctrine , after which the president will sign a decree introducing the new doctrine .
Russian President - Elect Vladimir Putin said the revision of the old military doctrine was prompted by changes in Russia and around the world in general .
Russia cannot `` remain indifferent '' to these changes , Putin said , citing new threats that require new avenues of military development .
In addition , Moscow `` cannot help noticing changes in the strategy of NATO , '' which in fact has become capable of making decisions without U.N. sanction , Putin said .
`` We must react appropriately '' to all these changes in order to avoid `` running into surprises , '' he said .
The new doctrine stresses nuke deterrence .
Under it , Russia can use nuclear weapons only in case of an aggression against itself or its allies and only when it is impossible to prevent by conventional means the liquidation of Russia as a subject of international relations .
The previous Russian military doctrine , which was approved on November 2 , 1993 , did not announce a possibility of using nuclear armaments so distinctly and firmly .
It just outlined conditions under which nuclear arms shall not be used .
Those conditions remain valid under the new doctrine .
Russia promises not to use nuclear arms against signatory states to the Nuclear Non - Proliferation Treaty of July 1 , 1968 and the states that do n't have nuclear weapons , with the exception of two circumstances : -- An armed attack at Russia , its territory , Armed Forces and other troops or its allies by a country , which has a union agreement with a nuclear power ; -- Joint moves of such a country and a nuclear power to invade or to make an armed attack at Russia , its territory , Armed Forces and other
The Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces is made up of three branches -- the Strategic Missile Troops , the Naval Strategic Forces and the Strategic Aviation Forces .
The Strategic Missile Troops , equipped with silo and mobile launchers , are a key component of the nuclear triad .
They have 756 launchers with 3,385 nuclear warheads .
The Naval Strategic Nuclear Forces are composed of 26 strategic nuclear-powered submarines , including six submarine missile-carrying cruisers of the Typhoon class , seven of the Dolphin class and 13 of the Kamar -LRB- Squid -RRB- class .
If fully loaded , these nuclear-powered submarines can carry up to 440 ballistic missiles with more than 2,000 warheads .
The Strategic Aviation has about 100 strategic assault aircraft of the Tu -160 , Tu -95MS and Tu -22MZ class , capable of carrying more than 800 nuclear warheads .
The adoption of the military doctrine and the concept of national security , as well as the ratification of START II and the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty by the parliament after Putin 's election as head of state , implies that Russia is more actively searching for ways of achieving national security and global strategic stability .
The approval of the two important treaties and the new military doctrine are also seen as Putin 's victories in domestic and foreign policies .
