UNITED NATIONS
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- The Security Council voted Friday to send a 6,000-strong U.N. peacekeeping force to Sierra Leone to help restore peace after an eight-year civil war .
A U.N. Mission in Sierra Leone will be established for six months at first to help safeguard the peace deal signed July 7 by the government and rebel leaders .
Sierra Leone 's new U.N. ambassador , Ibrahim Kamara , said the vote had reassured Sierra Leoneans that their plight was not at the bottom of the council 's agenda .
The U.N. peacekeepers wo n't actually be responsible for maintaining security in Sierra Leone .
That job will remain with the West African peacekeeping force that helped end the civil war .
But the resolution authorizes the U.N. force to take `` necessary action '' to ensure the security and movement of U.N. personnel , and to protect civilians .
The 6,000 peacekeepers , including 260 military observers , should be sent within 60 days to locations throughout the West African country to help disarm and demobilize the combatants , Undersecretary - General for Peacekeeping Bernard Miyet said .
Kamara stressed that the Nigerian -led force , known as ECOMOG , was crucial for implementing the July peace accord , and appealed to the Security Council to do everything it could to ensure that the force remained .
Nigeria 's U.N. ambassador , Arthur Mbanefo , commended the council for dispatching U.N. forces , saying it `` relieves us of a disproportionate burden in human and material resources . ''
He did not comment on whether Nigeria 's troops would remain in Sierra Leone , but said the country `` stands ready to play its part '' in the U.N. mission .
During the war , tens of thousands of people were killed by members of the Revolutionary United Front and their allies .
Thousands more had their hands , ears or lips hacked off in a display of rebel terror .
Under the July 7 agreement , rebel leader Foday Sankoh and Sierra Leone 's president , Ahmed Tejan Kabbah , agreed to form a power-sharing government .
Pledging America 's support for the peace agreement , U.S. Ambassador Richard Holbrooke said that , in discussing U.S. arrears with Congress , he emphasized that `` there is no double-standard in the United States concerning African peacekeeping -- that Sierra Leone is equally important to us as Kosovo and East Timor . ''
Holbrooke said , though , that the United States remained committed `` to the pursuit of accountability '' for war crimes .
U.N. special envoy for children in armed conflict , Olara Otunnu , urged rebel leaders to level with Sierra Leone 's children , many of whom have been displaced or maimed , and `` acknowledge fully their role in the horrific atrocities committed during the war . ''
