LAGOS , Nigeria
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Leaders of the United Nations and Commonwealth stepped up efforts to bridge the international diplomatic gulf with Nigeria with visits Monday to the sprawling West African country .
U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan , who hails from Ghana , met with Nigerian -born Commonwealth Secretary General Emeka Anyaoku shortly after the U.N. leader flew into the capital of Abuja Monday afternoon on a flight from Vienna .
Anyaoku arrived in his home country for talks with the country 's new military leader on Sunday .
The two leaders are the highest-profile international diplomats to visit Nigeria since the late military ruler Gen. Sani Abacha provoked widespread outrage by executing leading playwright and activist Ken Saro - Wiwa in November 1995 .
Both the U.N. and Commonwealth leaders were expected to meet military leader Gen. Abdulsalam Abubakar on Tuesday morning , government spokesman David Attah said .
During his two-day visit , Annan planned to meet a wide range of pro-democracy leaders , government officials and opposition activists , said Ahmad Fawzi , a member of Annan 's delegation .
On Wednesday he was to attend a `` mini heads-of-state summit '' organized by the Nigerian government , said Fawzi .
It was unclear which foreign leaders had been invited or what was on the agenda .
Annan , who was also to be the guest of honor at a state banquet thrown by Abubakar on Tuesday , said he was encouraged by `` rapid steps '' taken by the Nigerian general to `` affirm a transition to democratic and civilian rule , '' Fawzi said .
`` He hopes that all Nigerians will work together in a spirit of cooperation to ensure democracy .
It will require compromise flexibility and wisdom , and he trusts these qualities will not be lacking , '' the U.N. official said .
Anyaoku was also upbeat about the prospects for returning Nigeria to the international fold after years of being a pariah under the rule of the late Gen. Sani Abacha .
Abacha , who took power following a coup in 1993 , died of heart failure on June 8 and was succeeded by Abubakar .
`` My being here is the beginning of the process of re-integrating Nigeria into the international community , '' Anyaoku told reporters shortly after arriving .
`` The whole Commonwealth and the international community has welcomed the steps so far taken by the new leader and our hope is that this is just the beginning . ''
The Commonwealth , a 54-nation club of Britain and its former colonies , suspended Nigeria from its ranks in November 1995 .
British Foreign Office junior minister Tony Lloyd visited the former British colony last Friday on behalf of the European Union and praised Abubakar 's action in releasing political prisoners and moving towards restoring democracy .
Annan said he has been `` much encouraged '' by his recent intensive discussions with Abubakar , as well as the general 's early actions in power , and decided the time is right for such a trip .
He met Monday evening in an informal dinner with Nigerian foreign minister Tom Ikimi .
The country 's new military leader has raised expectations for democratic reforms by releasing more than 40 political prisoners .
However the country 's most prominent detainee , presumed 1993 elections winner Moshood Abiola , remains behind bars .
-LRB- fa-gam -RRB-
