ABUJA , Nigeria
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
The presidents of Sierra Leone and Liberia were heading for Nigeria on Wednesday for a mini summit with the country 's new military leader and U.N. Secretary - General Kofi Annan .
The summit comes as Annan is meeting with a number of top officials in the Nigerian government , and is also said to be planning to meet with Nigeria 's most prominent political prisoner , Moshood Abiola , the presumed winner of 1993 presidential elections .
Nigerian human rights and government officials , speaking on condition of anonymity , say the two men are expected to meet , but could give no further details .
U.N. spokesman Fred Eckhard had no comment on the possible meeting .
However , Commonwealth Secretary - General Emeka Anyaoku did meet with Abiola for over an hour , the Commonwealth Secretariat in London said in a statement .
No further details were immediately available .
Annan , who is from Ghana , and the Nigerian -born Anyaoku are the highest-profile international diplomats to visit Nigeria since the late ruler Gen. Sani Abacha provoked widespread outrage by executing leading playwright and activist Ken Saro - Wiwa in November 1995 .
Presidents Ahmed Tejan Kabbah of Sierra Leone and Charles Taylor of Liberia , meanwhile , left their home countries Wednesday morning for the meeting with Gen. Abdulsalam Abubakar and Annan , according to government officials in each country .
A senior official at the Sierra Leonean foreign ministry , speaking on customary condition of anonymity , said the meeting `` is a worthwhile opportunity to discuss some regional issues bordering on security and cooperation . ''
Liberian officials said part of the focus will be on the diplomatic row between that country and Sierra Leone .
Kabbah , who was deposed in a 1997 coup but was returned to power earlier this year by a Nigerian -led West African intervention force , has accused Liberia of supporting rebels who continue to battle his government .
Liberia , meanwhile , accuses of Sierra Leone of harboring rebels that want to unseat Taylor .
Sierra Leone and Liberia have been exchanging delegations in recent days to try to settle their disagreements .
Abubakar came to power last month after the death of Abacha , who left his country an international pariah because of his regime 's abysmal human rights record .
The new leader , though , appears to be making a concerted effort to move away from his predecessor 's policies by freeing political prisoners , meeting foreign delegations and reportedly even planning to free Abiola .
-LRB- gdc-jpl-crm-tjs -RRB-
