FREETOWN , Sierra Leone
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Since they arrived five weeks ago , British forces in Sierra Leone have been lauded as heroes who protected the capital from falling once again into the hands of one of the world 's most ruthless rebel groups .
But by Wednesday , many of the 1,000 British troops were gone or on the way out , fueling public fears of another attack by the rebel Revolutionary United Front .
The rebels killed thousands and systematically raped and maimed many others during an invasion of Freetown in January last year .
Only about 200 British military advisers are staying behind to equip and train a new army .
Sierra Leone 's former colonial ruler leaves the defense of this seaside capital to a troubled U.N. peacekeeping force that has seen hundreds of its troops kidnapped and equipment and weaponry stolen by the rebels .
`` While the British were here , we slept soundly at night .
We had confidence in them , '' said Bomposeh Kamara , a 35-year -old primary school teacher .
`` But now that they are leaving , I feel we are at the mercy of the rebels . ''
Without engaging in significant combat -- British troops were involved in at least one skirmish that left several rebels and civilians killed -- the British presence gained wide support among Sierra Leoneans after nearly nine years of civil war during which the West rarely intervened .
Civilians cheered as British warships anchored offshore and helicopters buzzed the city .
Commuters patiently allowed British troops to search vehicles one-by-one as other British soldiers with fingers on triggers trained laser rifle sites across the passengers .
Recognizing the stabilizing force the mission had become , British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook promised last week that two ships would stay behind to provide what he called a visible reminder of Britain 's commitment to its former colony .
If necessary , a British army officer said , more troops could be on the ground within 48 hours .
The British mission is one that almost never happened .
The original mandate was to evacuate expatriates , most of whom have since returned to Sierra Leone .
It was the threat of a rebel attack on Freetown -- and the memory of past attacks when rebels hacked off arms , legs and other appendages -- that prompted the British to safeguard the capital and nearby Lungi airport .
By Wednesday , patrol and checkpoint duties had been largely turned over to U.N. soldiers .
The U.N. force is promising a more robust response to the rebels , who signed a July peace accord but reignited the conflict last month by seizing more than 500 U.N. captives .
Although the hostages have been released , more than 200 U.N. troops are surrounded behind rebel lines in the east .
The outgoing British commander , Brig. David Richards , said the peacekeeping force known as UNAMSIL has learned from its early mistakes .
Initially scattered too thinly to hold its ground , Richards said , the force has nearly doubled in size , from 6,000 to 11,850 troops .
Communications between national forces involved -- some of which do n't have languages in common -- has also dramatically improved , he said .
`` When we first arrived , UNAMSIL appeared on the verge of collapse and the -LRB- Sierra Leonean -RRB- military was paralyzed by the hostage problem , '' Richards said .
`` Today the U.N. 's defense of Freetown and its environs is pretty rock solid . ''
Many of the Nigerian U.N. troops who replaced the British at Freetown checkpoints were members of a regional intervention force that fought the rebels for several years on behalf of the government .
Although the Nigerians sometimes abandoned their positions in times of crisis , British officials say they are better armed and equipped this time and motivated by the British example .
`` We managed to get the U.N. to believe that that they could defend , '' Richards said .
In the long term , Richards said the British military hoped to help the government contain the RUF by training and equipping the ragtag alliance of militias and ex-soldiers fighting the rebels .
Some of the government troops lack shoes .
Others are without uniforms and have difficulty in battle distinguishing each other from the rebels .
But in recent weeks , many of the government fighters have been given British -made rifles and ammunition .
About 1,000 have been chosen for training at Benguema , a government base 25 miles east of the capital , where British instructors will put them through a six-week course .
Richards believes the RUF 's days as a force able to intimidate Sierra Leoneans are numbered because of the U.N. resurgence and the United Kingdom commitment .
`` If I was an RUF ...
I would be thinking about laying down my weapons and giving up , '' he said .
