FREETOWN , Sierra Leone
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Sierra Leone soldiers and pro-government militia drove rebel forces farther from the capital Thursday , an army spokesman said , as the government moved to head off a feared guerrilla offensive on Freetown .
The fighting near the town of Newton , 25 miles east of Freetown , came as U.N. peacekeeping troops and pro-government forces geared up for a possible Revolutionary United Front , or RUF , advance on the nervous capital , where thousands of frightened villagers have sought sanctuary in recent days .
The battle near Newton pitted the recently rearmed Sierra Leone Army and the pro-government Kamajors -- a militia made up of traditional hunters -- against RUF rebels , said army spokesman Prince Nicol .
United Nations peacekeepers were not involved in the Thursday afternoon fighting , said David Wimhurst , a U.N. spokesman in Freetown .
But they did come under rebel fire overnight there and along a key highway at Port Loko , 65 miles to the east of Freetown , he said .
No U.N. casualties were reported , but there were unconfirmed reports some rebels were wounded , Wimhurst said .
In Washington , President Clinton on Thursday dispatched the Rev. Jesse Jackson as a special envoy to the region in an effort to halt `` a return to all-out war . ''
The president also directed American military officials to hasten efforts to ferry in more international peacekeepers .
Clinton said he spoke Thursday with U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan , and the two agreed a stronger international response is necessary .
`` We intend to support the commitment West African nations have made to send additional troops to Sierra Leone to restore peace , '' he said .
Chaos swept Sierra Leone after a Nigerian -led regional intervention force -- which had been in the country along with U.N. peacekeepers -- pulled out last week .
Angered by efforts to disarm them , the rebels -- who were to share power with the government under a peace accord signed in July -- began seizing peacekeepers .
By week 's end , they held more than 500 U.N. personnel .
In New York , U.N. spokesman Fred Eckhard said Thursday the rebels had freed two of the U.N. military officials .
Maj. Suresh Karki , a Nepalese military observer suffering from malaria , was released for medical treatment and Lance Corp. Paucho Singh Chouan , a member of the Indian contingent , was released unconditionally .
According to Eckhard , Karki said that neither he nor the 19 other people held with him were mistreated by the rebels .
The pair were freed Wednesday , an indication that there may be room for accommodation between the rebels and the government .
Late Thursday , the government of President Ahmed Tejan Kabbah said the peace agreement was salvageable .
`` While acknowledging that the RUF has seriously violated the positions of the accord , -LRB- the -RRB- government still believes that the accord can generally be implemented , '' said a statement issued by Kabbah 's office .
The United Nations wants to speed deployment of additional peacekeepers to bring its 8,700-strong force up to its mandated strength of 11,100 .
U.N. Secretary - General Kofi Annan suggested Thursday that the peacekeepers may need to take on a more active military role to enforce the country 's peace accord .
`` I plead with you , '' he told the Security Council in Thursday 's open session .
`` Let us not fail Sierra Leone .
Let us not fail Africa . ''
Britain sent 800 elite paratroopers into the West African country on Monday to secure the international airport in Freetown and help evacuate British and foreign citizens .
While the British government has repeatedly stressed that its soldiers will not be used in a combat role , British helicopters have ferried U.N. soldiers around the Freetown area , reports in Britain say .
Following a late night strategy session on Sierra Leone in London , British Prime Minister Tony Blair said troops from his nation would continue to evacuate British and European Union nationals but would not be fighting alongside U.N. peacekeepers .
Meanwhile , Sierra Leone soldiers thinking they were under attack , mistakenly fired on U.N. peacekeepers as they broke through rebel lines , the government said Thursday .
Six Kenyan peacekeepers were wounded .
The U.N. soldiers had been trapped near the town of Makeni , about 125 miles east of Freetown .
They were not among the 500 U.N. peacekeepers held hostage by the rebels .
Hundreds of U.N. troops who are not held captive have been cut off from their units inside pockets of rebel-held territory .
Sierra Leone 's army was disarmed under the July peace agreement that ended the eight-year civil war , but they have in recent days again taken up arms to defend the city .
Eckhard said the rearmament was done with the permission of the United Nations `` in order to deal with the actions taken by the Revolutionary United Front . ''
Nicol , a spokesman for former junta leader Johnny Paul Koroma , who leads many of the government soldiers , said , `` Our men are combing the area and are succeeding in clearing the way for British and -LRB- United Nations -RRB- troops . ''
U.N. soldiers , Sierra Leone army and pro-government militia fighters have been reinforcing the main road into Freetown over the past few days , preparing for an RUF offensive .
Nicols said Nigerian soldiers also were `` very , very active in supporting our boys . ''
While there have been repeated skirmishes outside Freetown , it remains unclear whether the RUF does plan to attack the capital .
`` Our reconnaissance flights do not show the RUF in an organized position , ready to pounce on Freetown , '' Eckhard said .
