Rebels have taken more than 300 U.N. troops hostage in Sierra Leone , U.N. and Clinton administration officials said Friday , and some peacekeeping units have lost contact with their command posts .
The 8,300-member U.N. force , composed mainly of African and Indian troops , was rapidly losing confidence under the assault , a Western diplomat reached by telephone in the capital of Freetown said .
He added that after the latest captures , on Thursday , the entire mission , meant to secure the peace after eight years of civil war , was in jeopardy .
He described the chances of an effective continuation of the mission , one the most ambitious peacekeeping efforts by the United Nations , as only `` 50-50 . ''
Talks were underway in Freetown between several commanders of the insurgent Revolutionary United Front and Western diplomats to try and stop the fighting , the diplomat said .
But it was unclear what progress was made .
Among the hostages was a contingent of about 200 Zambian soldiers , a U.N. spokesman said .
Their weapons were taken and they were stripped of their clothes , this spokesman said .
About a dozen armored vehicles belonging to the Zambians were also confiscated and were now being driven by the rebels , according to reports from the field .
Another contingent of more than 100 Nigerian peacekeepers was stripped of weapons and then released , said the spokesman , Fred Eckhart .
Further undermining the morale of the U.N. effort , parliamentarians in Kenya Friday called for the withdrawal of the Kenyan contingent of the peace force after four of their soldiers were missing and presumed dead .
U.N. peacekeepers were also taken hostage by the hundreds during the Bosnian war .
In May 1995 , Bosnian Serbs held more than 350 peacekeepers , some for several weeks , as insurance against air strikes by NATO .
Under a peace accord signed last July , the rebel leader , Foday Sankoh , whose forces have terrorized the country with a campaign of chopping off hands , feet and arms , was brought into a new national government .
At the time , some U.S. officials questioned the wisdom of bringing such a violent leader , who has become rich from plundering Sierra Leone 's diamond mines , under the government umbrella .
It was now becoming obvious , some officials said , that Sankoh was using his new government position as a temporary breather before making more war .
The timing of the assault by the rebels , who began their operation on Tuesday , seemed very precise , several administration officials said .
Sankoh 's troops -- assumed by the administration to number about 6,000 , with many of them unemployed teen-agers -- chose a window of opportunity just after many Nigerian troops had withdrawn from Sierra Leone and before the U.N. force was up to full strength .
The rebels also took advantage of a U.N. force that appeared to be ill-trained , easily intimidated and equipped with only light infantry armor , administration officials said .
Some of the troops were not following elementary military rules such as securing the perimeters of their bases , barracks and offices , one official said Friday .
Reports from the field in the last few days showed that some U.N. troops were so frightened by the reputation of the rebels that they abandoned their vehicles as soon as they were stopped at a roadblock by the rebels .
Describing how the U.N. troops gave up so easily , the official said : `` Some will say that 's what you get by hiring third world armies .
But in Somalia we had the same with first world armies . ''
This was a reference to U.S. forces who withdrew from Somalia in the first year of the Clinton administration after 17 soldiers were killed in a firefight .
As the situation in Sierra Leone continued to deteriorate , senior Clinton administration officials met at the White House to assess options .
Afterward , a senior State Department official said that a team of British military experts would arrive in Sierra Leone on Saturday to review the U.N. operation from `` top to bottom . ''
`` What we are continuing to do is look very carefully at whether the forces there and the reinforcements that can be brought in can have a useful effect , '' the official said .
The administration has said it is considering a request from the United Nations to provide transport planes to ferry some of the 3,000 Jordanian , Bengladeshi and Indian troops still scheduled to go to Sierra Leone .
There was absolutely no consideration of sending U.S. soldiers , officials said .
In similar situations in the past , though , the use of U.S. transport planes has required U.S. troops to help secure the airport to ensure that the aircraft and military personnel involved do not come under attack .
On the diplomatic front , Washington was asking regional leaders , including the president of Nigeria , Olusegun Obasanjo , to put pressure on Sankoh to stand by the peace agreement of last July , officials said .
The State Department also asked the Rev. Jesse Jackson to ask President Charles Taylor of Liberia to call for the rebel leader , who is a colleague , to cooperate .
At the United Nations , diplomats described how the Zambian convoy of 208 soldiers , who had arrived in Sierra Leone only two days earlier , was overwhelmed , and lost its 13 armored vehicles .
The troops were dispatched Thursday from Lungi , a port north of Freetown , to reinforce beleaguered peacekeeping troops at Makeni in the northern hinterland .
But they lost radio contact with the U.N. headquarters in the capital .
The Zambians passed through two rebel checkpoints and then at a third found themselves boxed in by a force of heavily armed guerrillas .
The convoy 's commander , faced with a battle that he felt he was sure to lose , negotiated a surrender .
In addition to the 208 Zambian soldiers , an estimated 110 other U. N. peacekeepers , military observers and civilian workers are being held by the rebels .
Under the mandate authorized by the Security Council for Sierra Leone , the peacekeepers may defend themselves but are not equipped for conventional combat .
A former U.S. assistant secretary for Africa , Henry J. Cohen , said Friday that the peacekeepers should have been more robustly equipped , including with artillery , to be able to give a `` show of strength . ''
Cohen said the peacekeeping force now faced two options : `` appease and lose face '' or use strong force against the rebels , including helicopter gunships .
Cohen added that if the U.N. force pulled out as it had in Somalia in 1993 and several years later in Rwanda , then Sankoh 's forces would `` sweep into power . ''
In the coming days , the immediate task , according to the Western diplomat in Freetown , was to see what `` you can do for the battalions that are not affected .
The key is to get the rebels to turn it off and to resolve some of the U.N. problems of organization and communication . ''
The Kenyans , who were the first target of the rebels , appeared to have encountered rebels who were `` more numerous , more committed . ''
But why the Kenyan unit unraveled so quickly was not clear , the diplomat said .
A Western diplomat said the peacekeepers were surrounded in unfamiliar terrain by armed adversaries .
`` They 're authorized to defend themselves but they 're not required to fight to the last man , '' he said .
Some embassies in Freetown began evacuating dependents and nonessential people .
More than 100 workers for nongovernment relief organizations were also reportedly been evacuated by U.N. helicopters .
U.N. Secretary - General Kofi Annan expressed concern in Paris on Thursday that the deteriorating situation in Sierra Leone might have a ripple effect in making member countries hesitate to contribute troops to a more complex peacekeeping operation being assembled for Congo .
`` The efforts right now are political in nature : to get anybody who has influence on Foday Sankoh to convince him to come back into compliance with the peace agreement , '' Eckhard said Friday .
`` If that fails , I do n't want to speculate what could happen next . ''
The rebel leader , who remains at his residence in Freetown , continued to deny Friday that his fighters have taken any U.N. peacekeepers hostage , asserting that they must have gotten lost .
`` What happened here was that there are people missing in the area because they are not familiar with the terrain , so I ordered my commanders to try and search for them , '' Sankoh said , according to Reuters .
Four U.N. helicopter gunships were supposed to have arrived last month , the diplomat said , but as of several days ago had still not shown up .
Whether the gunships would have been useful in the clash between the Kenyans and the rebels or the Zambians or the rebels was an open question , the diplomat said .
`` They are rather indiscriminate , '' the diplomat said of the helicopters .
`` As long as U.N. troops are with rebels I 'd be more cautious than sending up gunships to do their thing . ''
One of the options being discussed at the State Department in the last several days has been charging Sankoh with war crimes and trying to remove him from the scene , several officials said .
But this seemed an unlikely outcome , especially while Sankoh 's forces controlled U.N. troops .
Other officials said they were concerned that if Sankoh was removed , the rebel group would become even less manageable because it would fall into the hands of a number of disparate commanders .
As part of the peace accords of last summer , Sankoh was given a position as head of a commission designed to control the flow of illegal diamond exports from Sierra Leone .
The U.S. contributed $ 1 million to setting up the commission , an administration official said .
