WASHINGTON --
In a shift of policy , the Clinton administration plans to send hundreds of U.S. soldiers to Nigeria this month to train and equip West African battalions that will then be dispatched to Sierra Leone to bolster beleaguered government troops and United Nations peacekeepers there .
A senior administration official said the United States had `` gone through an agonizing reappraisal '' of its policy toward Sierra Leone , where guerrillas of the Revolutionary United Front -- notorious for chopping off the limbs of civilian victims -- are waging war against government forces and in May kidnapped hundreds of U.N. troops .
By training regional soldiers to join the U.N. force , Washington hopes to sideline the guerrillas and restore the government of Sierra Leone to effective power , Undersecretary of State Thomas P. Pickering said .
`` Our goal is to return the freely elected government to full control of the territory of Sierra Leone and to get the guerrillas demobilized , '' Pickering said .
Americans will train and equip five Nigerian battalions of 800 soldiers eac , one battalion from Ghana and one from a French -speaking West African country , possibly Mali or Senegal , said Pentagon officials .
Several hundred Special Forces will be sent from Fort Bragg , N.C. , late this month and next month , they said .
About 40 trainers are already in Nigeria .
In Congress , where there has been criticism of the administration 's lack of engagement in Sierra Leone , the latest decision has been received with relative warmth by Republicans .
`` I 've long held that there should be a more aggressive posture towards the RUF , '' said the chairman of the House subcommittee on Africa , Rep. Ed Royce , R - Calif .
`` This is a substantial change in the administration 's commitment to Sierra Leone .
It 's long overdue . ''
This move is the latest turn in the administration 's diplomacy toward Sierra Leone , a small West African nation that has been torn apart by the guerrilla force , which has seized valuable diamond mines and made a speciality of amputating the limbs of civilians .
Last summer , in an effort to end the civil war , the State Department helped engineer the accord reached in Lome , Togo , which received guarded international approval and brought the leader of the guerrillas , Foday Sankoh , into the government , effectively giving an amnesty for his troops ' atrocities .
In the months after the Lome accord was signed , the United Nations slowly assembled a peacekeeping force intended to take the place of a Nigerian -led , largely West African force that had recaptured Sierra Leone 's capital , Freetown , from the rebels early in 1999 .
But when the last of the Nigerian troops withdrew in early May , the rebels swiftly overran several positions of U.N. peacekeepers , taking nearly 500 of them hostage .
Most hostages were released after negotiations with Charles Taylor , the president of neighboring Liberia , and after Britain , the former colonial power in Sierra Leone , sent troops to help restore order .
The Clinton administration distanced itself from the Lome accord , saying as other foreign governments did that Sankoh should be removed from Sierra Leone government .
He was captured in May in Freetown , where he remains in custody .
But the administration declined to help the U.N. peacekeepers and raised the ire of the U.N. secretary-general , Kofi Annan , by trying to charge expensive rates for the use of Pentagon aircraft to ferry soldiers of other nations to Sierra Leone .
Now , officials say , the administration has switched tack after extensive criticism in Congress and angry exchanges with the British government , which made plain behind closed doors that it felt left alone in Sierra Leone .
In part , the new policy has been driven by President Clinton 's planned trip to Nigeria -- sub- Saharan Africa 's most populous country -- later this month .
Administration officials said that Clinton needed something substantial to announce once he got there and that the president was keen to bolster the new civilian leader of Nigeria , Olusegun Obasanjo , as well as to try and turn the tide in Sierra Leone .
On Friday the U.N. Security Council strengthened the mandate of the peacekeeping soldiers in Sierra Leone , authorizing them to go after the guerrillas in a forceful way .
Already early last month in Sierra Leone , U.N. troops backed by combat helicopters freed a group of unarmed military observers and some 200 Indian soldiers in an unusual battle that took the life of one peacekeeper but caused much higher rebel casualties .
The U.S. move will add about 4,000 troops from Nigeria alone to the U.N. force , which now stands at about 13,000 and is commanded by a general from India .
The West Africans will be trained as light infantry , ready to `` get off the roads and into the bush , '' the Pentagon official said .
A major goal for Sierra Leone 's government is to reclaim the diamond mines , the official added , so the revenues from diamonds go into the government treasury and not into the kitty of the rebels , enriching their leaders and allowing them to buy guns .
The Security Council banned trading in Sierra Leone diamonds on July 5 , and Holbrooke and other administration officials have spoken out against the reported smuggling of rebel diamonds to Taylor 's government in Liberia , which then markets the stones .
One difficulty in training Nigerian troops is that some soldiers in Nigerian units are thought to have committed human rights abuses in Sierra Leone and at home .
A congressional measure , sponsored by Sen. Patrick Leahy , D - Vt. , forbids the U.S. military from assisting foreign troops that have violated human rights .
The Nigerian government has been told to select the units it wants trained by the Americans , the Pentagon official said .
The U.S. Embassy in Nigeria is now checking on the units to `` make a reasonable effort , '' as required under the Leahy legislation , to ensure that soldiers who had violated human rights were excluded from the training , the official said .
