DARU , Sierra Leone --
This town , attacked 59 times during a nine-year civil war , was left for dead , deserted by its residents .
Its strategic airstrip was protected by forces loyal to the government but surrounded by brutal rebels who controlled the rest of eastern Sierra Leone .
Now , with United Nations peacekeepers here , life has begun to stir again in Daru .
Shops have opened as thousands have resettled here , some returning from refugee camps in Liberia , where many people fled .
Others have stopped here in the hope of eventually heading to their homes farther north in the heart of Sierra Leone 's diamond mining region , an area that the rebels have so far guarded fiercely from the U.N. troops .
-LRB- BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- `` I want to go back there , but not yet , '' said Salifu Din , 42 , who is from a village near the diamond mining city of Koidu and who arrived in Daru more than a month ago .
Din , who spent two years in a Liberian refugee camp with his wife and two children , has set up a small stand in the market here , selling nails , hammers and other tools that people are buying so they can rebuild .
He said he would try to go home when the U.N. troops moved into that area .
-LRB- END OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- The peacekeepers have slowly started pushing into rebel-held territory , like the area around Daru , providing the first glimpse into regions that for years were inaccessible to most outsiders except soldiers and mercenaries .
But despite the peace accord signed last July , more than half of Sierra Leone remains effectively under the control of the Revolutionary United Front , the group that waged a campaign of terror by chopping off ordinary citizens ' hands , arms and feet .
The peacekeepers are part of a U.N. mission that will bring more than 11,000 troops to this West African nation by July .
Already 7,400 troops are here , but many are the Nigerian soldiers who were already in Sierra Leone as part of a West African peacekeeping force .
The operation will be watched closely , especially as the U.N. Security Council considers sending troops to Congo , a much larger country whose conflict has drawn in half a dozen nations .
Under the Sierra Leone peace agreement , the nation should now be one entity .
But the reality is far different .
The government controls the area around the capital , Freetown , while the rebels retain authority in the north and east .
Two other groups -- former soldiers who were allied with the rebels and a civil defense militia known as the Kamajors who backed the government -- are ensconced in other parts .
Of the 45,000 estimated combatants , only about a third have been disarmed and demobilized .
The main rebel group , the Revolutionary United Front , has proved the most resistant .
The U.N. secretary-general , Kofi Annan , recently criticized its leader , Foday Sankoh , saying he was hampering progress with his `` often negative and confusing approach . ''
Despite repeated assurances by Sankoh that U.N. peacekeepers can go anywhere in the country , his soldiers have continued to block their advance .
In January the rebels stole significant amounts of weapons and equipment from Guinean and Kenyan peacekeeping troops .
-LRB- BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- The harassment has also delayed the delivery of aid for civilians in rebel-held territory .
The World Food Program , a U.N. agency , has yet to make deliveries in the far east and did not begin distribution in the north until March .
`` It 's a test , '' said Julie Thoulouzan , a program coordinator for the program in Freetown .
-LRB- END OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- After a battalion of Indian peacekeepers arrived in Daru in February , more than 100 troops were able to move recently to another eastern town , Kailahun .
`` We have had a great deal of difficulty getting to this area , '' said Lt. Col. Amit Sharma .
`` The RUF set up barricades .
They would allow us through now and then .
One day they would say , ` Peace , peace , peace . '
The next day they would stop our convoy .
The same men , the same place . ''
A helicopter ride from Freetown to Daru provides a view of endless forest , the monotony broken by the occasional town and village , whose lands have largely been left uncultivated because of the war .
Along rivers about 20 miles west of here in a town called Kenema , people could be seen toiling in water-filled holes , mining for diamonds .
Diamond mining is mainly done along riverbeds in Sierra Leone and is mostly illicit .
In Kenema , military officials said , Lebanese merchants sell water pumps , which diamond prospectors use to fill holes with water so they can look for diamonds , as if they were panning for gold in the American Old West .
Diamonds have fueled the conflict , as they have in Congo and Angola , providing the warring parties the means to buy arms .
Diamond trafficking has been particularly important to the main rebel group , which has ties to Liberia 's president , Charles Taylor .
It has financed its war with diamonds smuggled out through Liberia and Burkina Faso .
Not surprisingly , even as Sankoh has professed his commitment to peace , his soldiers have remained armed .
They have not allowed peacekeepers to move into the areas with the richest diamond mines , which are centered on Koidu .
U.N. military observers who have visited the area escorted by rebel soldiers said people could be seen digging feverishly for diamonds -- apparently doing as much mining as possible before the rainy season starts in April and makes it impossible .
`` Maybe they 'll try to hold on to it until before the elections , '' one military observer said , expressing the commonly held opinion that Sankoh is not fully committed to peace and is preserving a military option .
Under the peace agreement , Sankoh joined a power-sharing government and is chairman of a government commission in charge of the nation 's mineral resources .
The accord was criticized by human rights organizations for granting blanket amnesty to Sankoh and others widely believed to be guilty of crimes against humanity .
It allowed the rebels to become a political party that will be able to offer candidates in the presidential and legislative elections scheduled for early 2001 .
Diplomats and international aid agency officials based in Freetown say they believe that Sankoh has been amassing money for his future political efforts .
They also suspect that he may try to win the elections by simply threatening to resume the fighting if he loses -- the same approach used successfully by Taylor , a former rebel who won an election in Liberia in 1997 .
Sankoh , who pushed for early elections during the peace talks , has denied delaying the peace .
Recently he even blamed the peacekeepers for impeding the distribution of aid to civilians .
U.N. officials reject the accusation and contend that Sankoh is responsible for the delays in bringing peace to the area .
Oluyemi Adeniji , the U.N. special envoy to Sierra Leone , said in an interview that the delays might `` have an effect on the timing of the elections . ''
Adeniji , a Nigerian , added that the United Nations would not endorse elections held while one or more of the warring sides remained armed .
`` Of course , the U.N. would not want to get involved , either in providing logistics or observing elections that may be fundamentally flawed , '' he said .
Here in Daru , the slow process of rebuilding has begun .
Capt. Sandeep Shah , a munitions expert , has collected four tons of unexploded bombs inside two concrete buildings .
He found many of the explosives strewn across Daru .
In a third building are stacks of rifles collected from the 500 former combatants who have passed through Daru 's camp for what is called disarmament , demobilization and reintegration , or DDR .
`` I do n't despair , '' said Maj. Gen. Vijay K. Jetley , the commander of the peacekeeping troops .
`` I find there is a lot of hope .
While DDR is going slowly , I think it 's a matter of time .
Two months ago there was not a single person in the camp in Daru . ''
-LRB- BL -RRB-
