The United States and Britain agreed on Monday to provide limited help to a U.N. peacekeeping mission in Sierra Leone that appears to be dazed and overwhelmed , with rebels killing civilians in the capital Freetown and continuing to hold more than 500 U.N. soldiers hostage .
But despite appeals from the U.N. secretary-general , Kofi Annan , for a rapid reaction force to save the peacekeeping effort , the Clinton administration agreed only to provide transport planes , and Britain sent a 700-man force there primarily to assist with the evacuation of its nationals .
In Sierra Leone , violence and confusion continued to reign .
In Freetown , the rebel leader , Foday Sankoh , who is widely regarded in the West as a war criminal , slipped out of sight amid a mass demonstration that turned into a deadly shootout near his compound .
Soldiers loyal to Sankoh fired into a crowd of rock-throwing protesters , killing at least four .
While emphasizing that it will not send ground troops , the Clinton administration agreed on Monday to transport 700 Bangladeshi soldiers to the West African country .
But the airlift had no timetable and officials have said it was not clear when the troops would be ready to leave .
The United States also sent a military team to nearby Nigeria to help organize the movement of up to two Nigerian army battalions to Sierra Leone .
For several days , Annan has been asking Washington for help in airlifting peacekeepers from three battalions committed by Jordan , India and Bangladesh ahead of their scheduled deployment in Sierra Leone next month .
The U.N. peacekeeping force is now about 2,300 short of its Security Council mandated strength of 11,000 .
The Clinton administration was waiting for the outcome of a summit of West African nations in Nigeria Tuesday to determine whether the peacekeeping force in Sierra Leone should be beefed up or essentially abandoned as a lost cause , American officials said .
It was possible that the situation had deteriorated to such an extent and that rebel forces had gained so much control that there was no peace to keep , the officials said .
If the Nigerians wanted to send in new battalions of soldiers , operating as a West African force as they had in the past , and not under the U.N. flag , the administration would favor such a move , the officials said .
Britain said that it was sending at least 700 soldiers to secure the airport near Freetown so that foreigners there could safely leave .
Unlike the United States , Britain did not rule out using its troops in ground fighting in its former colony , Foreign Secretary Robin Cook said the British soldiers were not going as `` combat troops , '' but left open the possibility that they could assist the U.N. peacekeepers .
An advance force of 250 British paratroopers crossed into the country on Monday from Senegal and 200 were flying in from Britain .
Addressing Parliament , where the opposition Conservative Party expressed reservations about British troops becoming involved in the fighting , Cook said , `` We must not allow a few thousand rebels to prevent the end to violence . ''
The British takeover of the airport would make it much easier to fly reinforcements into the country , and would enable the Americans to send their transports without additional ground support .
At the United Nations , Annan scrambled on several fronts on Monday to stave off collapse of the peacekeeping mission .
He met with Secretary of State Madeleine Albright , who expressed enthusiastic , if vague , support for the mission .
`` We are looking at ways we can be supportive , '' Albright told reporters after their meeting .
Asked whether that would include contributing to a rapid reaction force , the secretary of state said , `` We are looking at how to provide logistical support . ''
Albright , who was in New York for the funeral of Cardinal John O'Connor , declined to go into details of her private discussions with Annan beyond saying that Sierra Leone was at the top of their list of topics .
Annan earlier had said that `` in addition to U.N. efforts , a rapid reaction force may be needed in Sierra Leone as soon as possible to assist in restoring conditions conducive to the resumption of the peace process . ''
Annan also appealed to Sierra Leone 's neighbors , particularly Liberia and Guinea , to prevent rebels based on their soil from crossing back into Sierra Leone , according to his spokesman , Fred Eckhard .
He said there were reports that some fighters were crossing the border , apparently to join the main guerrilla force .
Liberia 's president , Charles Taylor , has long supported the Revolutionary United Front , as insurgents loyal to Sankoh call themselves .
As a precaution , the secretary general ordered the evacuation of 266 non-essential U.N. personnel from Sierra Leone , leaving 55 U.N. civilian employees in the country .
Some embassies and aid agencies have already flown some of their employees and dependents out of the country .
Eckhard acknowledged on Monday that the United Nations ' performance had been hampered by a breakdown in its outdated communications equipment , which made it difficult for the operations center in Freetown to stay in contact with units in the field .
He also confirmed that the lightly armed peacekeepers arrived without tanks or artillery , the kind of heavy weapons that might have cowed the guerrillas .
Over the last week , the rebels have seized and are holding more than 500 U.N. peacekeepers , at least 400 of whom are Zambian , and taken their weapons , ammunition and at least 13 armored personnel carriers .
But on Monday , the United Nations reduced the number of its soldiers reported killed from four to one Kenyan , with another Kenyan missing-in-action .
The secretary general has also dispatched Bernard Miyet , the head of the United Nations ' peacekeeping department , to Freetown to encourage the mission there .
With his military options limited , Annan has been telephoning a series of African leaders since last week , asking for their intervention in fashioning a regional political solution that would put Sierra Leone 's peace agreement back on track and convince Sankoh to call his fighters off .
The leaders of Sierra Leone and three other West African countries -- Guinea , Liberia and Mali -- met in Conakry on Monday with Oluyemi Adeniji , a Nigerian who is the United Nations ' special representative to Sierra Leone .
On Tuesday , the Nigerian president , Olusegun Obasanjo , has planned another meeting of nine African countries , including Sierra Leone and Liberia , in Nigeria 's capital , Abuja .
Nigerian troops battled the rebels as part of a West African force before the U.N. peacemakers arrived .
Their departure , which concluded last week , apparently helped embolden Mr. Sankoh 's fighters to turn on the U.N. peacekeepers , who were attempted to secure territory in rebel-held parts of Sierra Leone where diamonds are mined .
The rebels have supported their war and enriched their leaders by smuggling diamonds into the international market through Liberia .
