LAGOS , September 27 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Nigerian government , together with international agencies , will pool some 200 million U.S. dollars for the advancement of science , engineering and technology in the west African country .
The program is to be anchored by the United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organization -LRB- UNESCO -RRB- and strongly committed by Nigerian government , according to the Guardian , a leading Nigerian newspaper Monday .
Nigerian President Olusegun Obasanjo has launched a Special Framework Plan of Action to ensure the scheme 's success , said the paper .
The special plan , according to Fola Osotimehin , a UNESCO science policy adviser in Paris , France , is intended to reinforce international operation with Nigeria in the efforts at national reconstruction and development and strengthening of democracy .
Besides , science and technology , education , culture , communication , informatics and information are other sectors that would benefit from the plan .
Osotimehin , who coordinated a Consultative Forum on Budgeting for Scientific , Engineering and Technological Activities in Abuja last week , said that Nigeria had invested in the establishment of a fairly adequate Science and Technology -LRB- S&T -RRB- infrastructure .
He said , however , that the infrastructure needed to be reinforced and modernized .
`` A major urgent requirement is the reform of the national science and technology system and this is the main goal of the science component of the Special Nigeria - UNESCO Plan of Action , '' Osotimehin said .
The reform being pursued is aimed at increasing the effectiveness of the national science and technology system , particularly by ensuring that S&T outputs are used in attaining important macro-economic objectives for the benefit of the masses .
Such benefits include job creation , diversification of the economy , promotion of exports and protection of the environment .
The reform , which will involve the evaluation of S&T policies , programs and institutions , is expected to be undertaken during the next rolling plan .
Osotimehin said the preparation of next year 's budget is an opportunity to launch the reform process .
He added that there is a need for science and technology to address the economic needs of the country rather than scientists being concerned about their professional competence .
`` That is important , but we should not downplay the economic outcome of science and technology , '' he said .
UNESCO Representative to Nigeria and ECOWAS , Emmanuel Apea , reiterated at the close of the four-day forum , which began last Monday , that science and technology should play proper role in the national efforts for economic growth and national development .
