VIENNA , April 30 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- China is ready to strengthen cooperation with other countries and international organizations in combating and preventing organized transnational crime , a senior Chinese official said here today .
China 's deputy minister of justice , Zhang Geng , made the remarks in a speech at the Sixth Session of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice .
Zhang said that the Chinese government appreciates the efforts by the United Nations in crime prevention and criminal justice and has taken an active part in U.N. activities in the area .
`` We are ready to strengthen cooperation with other governments and international organizations and make our contributions to the joint efforts in combating and preventing organized transnational crime , '' he said .
Zhang said that in the past few years , China 's law enforcement authorities cracked numerous cases in southeast China involving killing , kidnapping and racketeering by members of criminal gangs which entered China from overseas .
They also assisted police authorities of other countries in tracking down and arresting members of criminal gangs , he said .
Zhang said that China amended its Criminal Law recently to enhance the fight against organized crime , money-laundering , terrorist crime , trafficking of illegal immigrants and environment-related crimes .
The amended penal code will play a greater role in combating transnational crime after it comes into force on October 1 , 1997 , he said .
By the end of 1996 , China has signed 32 judicial assistance agreements with 25 countries and extradition agreements with six countries , Zhang said .
`` We have also cooperated with other countries with which no agreements have been signed on a case by case basis in the principle of mutual benefit , '' he said .
Zhang said that the Chinese government is ready to expand its cooperation with other countries , including signing more agreements , on the basis of mutual respect for each other 's sovereignty , judicial independence and dignity .
