LAGOS , June 26 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The World Trade Organization -LRB- WTO -RRB- has urged Nigeria to carry out `` credible reforms '' and move quickly toward a rules -based market economy .
The WTO , in a report on Nigeria 's trade policy released Wednesday , urged the Nigerian government to pursue `` credible structural reforms '' of its economy to help liberalize its trade and improve living standards in Africa 's biggest oil producing country , the Guardian newspaper said Friday .
The WTO report said foreign investors outside the oil and gas sector have largely steered clear of Nigeria due to corruption and political stability .
The government of late General Sani Abacha has left behind a mismanaged and neglected state sector well on the way to total collapse , leaving Nigerians short of fuel , power , transport and communications , the report said .
The WTO pointed out that the oil industry responsible for more than 95 percent of Nigeria 's export earnings remains in a parlous state , with the development of new reserves held up by underfunding and a failure to agree on crucial terms to protect investors .
The world trade watchdog called on Nigeria to remove import prohibitions , reform inefficient public sectors such as telecommunications , oil refining and chemicals and introduce legislation on competition policy .
`` Recent steps to increase transparency and accountability in government , and thus combat allegations of fraud and corruption , must be pursued if international confidence in Nigeria 's economy is to be regained , '' it said .
`` Increased transparency and accountability would signal Nigeria 's commitment to a rules -based market economy , '' the WTO said .
The WTO recognized the efforts by the Nigerian government to reform its customs , pre-shipment inspection and port policies , but said such efforts have been so far uneven .
`` Illegal levies at ports substantially increase the cost of importing and consequently , a large share of Nigeria 's external trade is conducted informally through ports in neighboring countries , '' it said .
The report said illegal discharging levies at Nigerian ports increased the cost of imports by as much as 45 percent , thus diverting large flow of trade to neighboring ports .
