LAGOS , September 23 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Britain and the United States of America are expected to lift sanctions against Nigeria in a bid to normalize their relations with the country , according to local press reports Wednesday .
Following a meeting in London Tuesday between British Prime Minister Tony Blair and Nigerian Head of State Gen. Abdulsalam Abubakar , British Prime Minister 's office said that Blair was `` confident that all measures except the arms embargo could be lifted soon . ''
It was reported that Blair had been personally impressed by Gen. Abubakar and hoped to be able to work with him in bringing Nigeria back into the international community .
The British Prime Minister 's office noted that Britain expected the European Union -LRB- EU -RRB- sanctions against Nigeria to be lifted soon as a reward for the government 's commitment to restoring democracy .
The EU imposed limited sanctions on Nigeria including an arms embargo and a visa ban on the country 's leadership in 1995 after former Nigerian Head of State Sani Abacha ordered the execution of writer Ken Saro Wiwo and his eight fellow Ogoni activists .
The office stated that Blair was also working for `` positive steps '' within the Commonwealth from which Nigeria was suspended over the same reason in 1995 .
Abubakar , who is on a visit to Britain , The United States and France and to address the 53rd U.N. General Assembly , Tuesday held talks with Commonwealth Secretary General Chief Emeka Anyaokwu shortly after he concluded his meeting with Blair .
At the meeting , Anyaokwu invited Gen. Abubakar to speak at the Commonwealth Summit next month on the situation in Nigeria , indicating that the relations between the Commonwealth and Nigeria may be normalized soon , the local paper Nigerian Tribune said .
Meanwhile , U.S. Embassador to Nigeria William Twadell said in Lagos Tuesday that steps are being taken by his government to lift the sanctions placed on Nigerian armed forces in 1994 .
He disclosed that a U.S. military delegation is scheduled to visit Nigeria within next few weeks to have talks with Nigerian top military officers on the lifting of sanctions .
A larger delegation is also expected in Nigeria to address issues related to law enforcement and counter-narcotic cooperation between the United States and Nigeria , the ambassador added .
Another delegation is expected to discuss with officials of Nigerian Ministry of Aviation on the reopening of direct flight from Murtala Mohammed International Airport in Lagos to the U.S. Twadell noted that `` the purpose of those visits is really to reinitiate dialog to discuss the whole range of areas in which our two military establishments and indeed our two governments can work together . ''
Local newspaper New Nigerian quoted the ambassador as saying that `` we have been very encouraged by the initiative by the Head of State Gen. Abubakar in his political program and efforts he has undertaken in the last few months . ''
`` We are in for an accelerated progression of events that will enable us to reconsider those measures -LRB- sanctions and restrictions -RRB- and move forward in a very mutually cooperative and reinforcing manner , '' Twadell stressed .
