BERN , Switzerland
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
After a 2 1/2-year investigation into the brother of former Mexican President Carlos Salinas de Gortari , Switzerland 's federal prosecutor said Tuesday she has ordered the confiscation of dlrs 114.4 million in accounts in Switzerland and Britain .
Carla del Ponte said the investigation had concluded that funds in the accounts , of which Raul Salinas de Gortari is co-owner , came partly from protection payoffs .
Raul Salinas is in prison in Mexico pending completion of trials in Mexico in a political assassination and on a charge of illegal enrichment during his brother 's 1988-1994 administration .
The Swiss have been investigating whether Raul Salinas helped launder drug money during that period .
The investigators concluded that Colombia 's Medellin and Cali drug cartels as well as Mexican traffickers paid Raul Salinas at least dlrs 500 million over 10 years in protection money for drug shipments through Mexico , Valentin Roschacher , the chief of Switzerland 's anti-narcotics police , told a news conference .
The Swiss discontinued their own proceedings on charges of money laundering against Raul Salinas and three co-defendants , but said their findings `` inevitably suggest money laundering '' of drug profits .
Del Ponte said Switzerland could n't itself try Salinas as he is imprisoned in Mexico .
Mexican proceedings against Salinas and others on money laundering charges made a Swiss criminal case unnecessary , she added .
Most of the money seized -- dlrs 89.9 million -- ordered confiscated is in Swiss bank accounts .
But a further dlrs 24.5 million is in London , administered by a Swiss -based financial institution .
Salinas ' lawyers can appeal the decision , taken Monday , within ten days .
That would send the case to Switzerland 's supreme court , but Del Ponte said she was `` very confident '' it would uphold the seizure .
Both Del Ponte and Roschacher declined to say whether investigations had shown Carlos Salinas to be involved with drug money .
Denying links to drug traffickers , Raul Salinas has said the money in the Swiss accounts was an investment fund pooled by several wealthy friends .
But Del Ponte said `` the business dealings he claims are beyond all economic logic . ''
The investigation concluded Raul Salinas `` had close personal and business relationships both with Colombian and Mexican drug dealers and with Mexican justice and administration officials , '' Roschacher said .
Witnesses spoke of `` green light days '' on which , after agreement between drug traffickers and corrupt officials , drugs destined for the United States could be transported through Mexico on certain routes .
`` With all his contacts and his power , he could guarantee protection for those loads , '' Roschacher added .
Salinas ' contacts with drug traffickers started in the 1980s and became more intense under his brother 's presidency in the early 1990s , he continued .
Seven countries including Mexico and the United States collaborated with the Swiss inquiry .
Six U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration analysts helped with the investigation in Bern at various points , Roschacher said .
The investigators interviewed 78 witnesses , 31 of them bank employees , and 16 of them had to testify anonymously for their own safety , Roschacher said .
Raul Salinas himself was questioned four times .
A number of witnesses have been killed in Mexico in the course of the investigation , he added .
Swiss authorities did not release the full 230-page police report into Salinas .
Authorities seized his Swiss bank accounts in 1995 .
Some dlrs 7.8 million have since been unblocked as the money was proved unlinked to drugs or protection payments , Del Ponte said .
Salinas is in prison pending completion of his trials on charges of masterminding the 1994 murder of political rival Jose Francisco Ruiz Masseiu , and of illicit enrichment while he held a midlevel government post in his brother 's administration .
No specifically drug-related charges have been brought against Raul Salinas and he was acquitted of money laundering on a technicality .
His brother , who moved to Ireland shortly after leaving office , has been charged with no crime .
