SWEETWATER , Fla .
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- The Cuban government has been involved in efforts to smuggle drugs into the United States , witnesses told a House committee on Monday .
Jorge Masetti , a former Cuban intelligence agent , and Ileana de la Guardia , the daughter of a Cuban colonel executed in 1989 for drug trafficking , gave their testimony , adding to what some House members say is a growing account of the island nation 's role in the drug trade .
`` Cuba used the drug trafficking route to send weapons to Colombia and in exchange they paid them with favors ; for example , many of them bring the drugs through Cuba , '' Masetti , who now lives in Spain , told the committee .
Committee members want Cuba added to the U.S. government 's so-called `` Major 's List '' of drug-trafficking countries .
Cuba has denied the allegations of drug-trafficking .
Gen. Barry McCaffrey , director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy , has said there is no conclusive evidence to indicate that Cuban leadership is involved in drug trafficking .
Masetti , who claims the Cuban government helped finance a 1983 robbery of a Wells Fargo armored truck in West Hartford , Conn. , which netted $ 7.2 million , also told committee members he saw diplomatic pouches filled with dollars -- presumably drug profits -- in low denominations brought into Cuba .
`` These bags were brought , one half to the Ministry of the Interior , the other half to Jose Naranjo , aide to Fidel Castro , '' Masetti said .
De la Guardia , the daughter of Cuban Col. Antonio de la Guardia , testified that her father took the fall for higher-ups in the government .
She said her father did not have the rank to give drug traffickers ' planes free passage through Cuban air space .
`` This had to come from a higher level of authority , namely , Raul Castro , '' she said .
Rep. Lincoln Diaz - Balart , R - Fla. , said it was important to hear a witness `` directly corroborate the Cuban government 's participation in drug-trafficking activities . ''
Committee members said there is evidence the Cuban government has been involved in drug trafficking .
Rep. Ileana Ros - Lehtinen , R - Fla. , cited the seizure of a 7.5-ton cocaine shipment by Colombia 's narcotics police Dec. 3 , 1998 .
House committee members said they believe the shipment was destined to pass through Cuban waters before reaching the United States .
