UPATA , Venezuela
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- For nearly two years , a nondescript abandoned farm house in the remote eastern jungles of Venezuela served as a sanctuary for an international drug gang smuggling Colombian cocaine to Europe and the United States .
This week , Venezuelan and international anti-drug agents finally outwitted the cartel , seizing a record 10 tons of cocaine and arresting at least 16 people in an operation that has been a source of pride for a country at odds with the United States over anti-narcotics flights .
Venezuelan officials have lauded the bust , the largest in the South American nation 's history , as proof President Hugo Chavez is serious about fighting drugs despite refusing to allow U.S. anti-drug planes to fly over Venezuelan territory -- a decision that has hurt U.S. anti-narcotics activities in the Caribbean .
Venezuela is a major trafficking route for Colombian cocaine bound for Europe .
Authorities are still hunting the bosses of the Los Mellizos drug gang and trying to determine who owned the businesses and ranches that sheltered the smugglers in Venezuela for nearly two years .
`` The most difficult part of this investigation is still to come , '' Col. Jose Antonio Paez , second-in-command of the National Guard 's anti drug unit , told reporters on the desolate farm .
`` We still do n't know who was behind all of this , '' Paez said , gesturing toward the 5,000-acre farm that has its own airstrip , presumably to receive cocaine from Colombia .
It took an eight-month international investigation , using sophisticated telephone bugging equipment and a network of informers , to find the Doble Uno ranch , nine miles from the nearest city , Puerto Ordaz .
The operation , dubbed Orinoco 2000 , resulted in arrests in Venezuela , France and Italy .
The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration helped finance the raids , and Colombia , France , Britain , Italy , Greece and Panama also collaborated .
The grounds surrounding the rundown farm house show not a trace of the millions of dollars of cocaine that passed through the premises for months .
Even the mile-long airstrip looks like a dirt road .
The National Guard combed the premises for two weeks before discovering 2.5 tons of cocaine Wednesday night buried in two six-foot pits deep inside thickets of trees -- the latest of three seizures netting the 10 tons of cocaine .
Paez said the National Guard would have never found the latest haul -- stored in 2.2-pound paper bags -- if not for the confessions of two freshly nabbed suspected smugglers .
The National Guard captured the two suspects on a remote river island about 22 miles from the ranch .
On that island -- in the middle of the Orinoco River -- authorities first discovered 5 tons of cocaine last Friday .
Paez led 70 soldiers in pursuit of the fugitives for five days .
Seven motor boats surrounded the island and soldiers combed the swampy land until the suspects were caught trying to hitch a ride with passing fishing boats .
`` They could n't hold out .
They had no food and they told us that every time they poked their heads out they saw soldiers patrolling the grounds , '' Paez said .
The two initially pretended to be tourists but soon confessed and revealed the location of the pits with cocaine after being promised lighter sentences , Paez said .
Paez says most of those detained carry Venezuelan identity cards which he suspects are false .
Soldiers insisted most of the detainees are Colombian .
There is strong evidence to show that the cocaine packets were airdropped from Colombia , Paez said .
`` The packets had fluorescent hooks which tells me that they were dropped by air at night , '' Paez said .
He said he suspects the farm was a holding spot for the cocaine which was then taken by land or through the Orinoco River en route to the Caribbean for shipment to Europe .
Paez insisted the presence of a major drug cartel operating in the country does not mean Venezuela has become a refuge for traffickers .
`` When you find these things people say , ` so does that mean that drug trafficking is growing in Venezuela ? '
Why do n't they say I 'm doing my job better ? ''
Paez said .
