WASHINGTON --
Early last year , as undercover U.S. Customs agents neared the end of the biggest investigation ever conducted into the illegal movement of drug money , bankers working with Mexico 's most powerful cocaine cartel approached them with a stunning offer .
The agents , posing as money launderers from Colombia , had insinuated themselves deeply into the Mexican underworld , helping the traffickers hide more than $ 60 million .
Now , money men working with the cartel said they had clients who needed to launder $ 1.15 billion more .
The most important of those clients , they said , was Mexico 's powerful defense minister .
The customs agents did n't know whether the money really existed or if any of it belonged to the minister , Gen. Enrique Cervantes , officials said .
But having heard about American intelligence reports pointing to corruption at high levels of the Mexican military , the agents were mystified by what happened next .
Rather than continue the undercover operation to pursue the deal , Clinton administration officials ordered to shut it down on schedule several weeks later .
No further effort was ever made to investigate the offer , and officials said prosecutors have not even raised the matter with the suspects in the case , who have pleaded guilty and are cooperating with the authorities .
`` Why are we sitting on this kind of information ? '' asked the former senior customs agent who led the undercover probe , William F. Gately .
`` It 's either because we 're lazy , we 're stupid , or the political will does n't exist to engage in the kind of investigation where our law-enforcement efforts might damage our foreign policy . ''
Senior administration officials denied that foreign policy influenced their decision to end the operation , saying they were moved primarily by concerns for its security .
They also emphasized that the agents were unable to verify the Mexican traffickers ' claims .
Other officials of the administration , which has based much of its Mexican drug strategy on collaboration with Cervantes , said they are confident that he is above reproach .
A spokesman for the Mexican Defense Ministry , Lt. Col. Francisco Aguilar Hernandez , dismissed the traffickers ' proposal as self-serving lies .
But a detailed account of the case -- based on confidential government documents , court records and dozens of interviews -- suggests that U.S. officials walked away from an extraordinary opportunity to examine allegations of the official corruption that is considered the main obstacle to anti-drug efforts in Mexico .
For nearly a decade , American officials have been haunted by the spectacle of Mexican officials being linked to illicit activities soon after they are embraced in Washington .
And just weeks before the customs investigation , known as Operation Casablanca , ended last year , administration officials received intelligence reports indicating that the Mexican military 's ties to the drug trade were more serious than had been previously thought .
But when faced with the possibility that one of Washington 's critical Mexican allies might be linked to the traffickers , the officials gave the matter little consideration .
They said they opted for a sure thing , arresting mid-level traffickers and their financial associates and at least disrupting the money laundering system that drug gangs had set up .
To reach for a general , they said , would have added to their risks with no certainty of success .
`` Obviously it was a significant allegation , '' Customs Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said in an interview .
But he added : `` There was skepticism about it .
Was it puffing ?
It just was not seen as being -- I wo n't use the word credible -- but it was n't verified . ''
When senior administration officials announced the sting last May 18 , they took a triumphant inventory : the indictments of three big Mexican banks and bankers from a dozen foreign banks ; the arrests of 142 suspects ; the confiscation of $ 35 million in drug profits and the freezing of accounts holding $ 66 million more .
The officials claimed the success as the result of a longstanding administration fight against money laundering .
But Gately , who retired from the Customs Service on Dec. 31 , said his investigation ran a gantlet of resistance from the start .
The Justice Department , uncomfortable with cases in which undercover agents laundered more money for drug traffickers than they ultimately seized , were imposing new limits on the time that such operations could run and the money they could launder , officials said .
And though the restrictions did not apply to Customs , a branch of the Treasury , Justice Department officials continued to play strong , skeptical roles in supervising cases throughout the government .
One federal official , who spoke on the condition of anonymity , admitted that he initially dismissed Gately 's plan as a nonstarter .
`` You 're out of your mind , '' the official remembered saying .
Several colleagues said it was the sort of response that Gately , 49 , tended to see as a challenge .
A decorated former Marine who enlisted for service in Vietnam at the age of 17 , he had already been at the center of several cases that mixed internal struggle and public success .
Friends and critics described him in similar terms : driven , sometimes abrasive and unusually creative .
After leading an investigation that revealed ties between the Italian mafia and Colombian cocaine cartels , Gately co-wrote a 1994 book about the case , `` Dead Ringer , '' that cast him as a lonely crusader surrounded by small-minded bureaucrats .
`` It is the story of one man who refused to succumb to corruption , '' the prologue reads , `` who believed in his oath and mission , and the consequences he paid for believing in what he was doing . ''
As the senior customs drug investigator in Los Angeles , Gately said , he first heard from an informant in 1993 about an important shift in the way that Mexican and Colombian drug traffickers were converting their cash into funds that could be freely spent .
The informant said traffickers were depositing their money with corrupt Mexican bankers , who sent it back to them in almost untraceable cashier 's checks drawn on the American accounts that the Mexican banks used to do business in the United States .
Gately hoped his informant could infiltrate that system -- collecting illicit cash from drug wholesalers in the United States and then wiring it to corrupt bankers in Mexico .
The bankers would issue drafts for the money , and customs would develop evidence against suspects on both ends of the transaction .
Many customs officials , however , were skeptical that the ruse would work .
Drug -enforcement agents wanted to use the informant in another case .
One federal prosecutor opposed using him at all because he had a criminal past and threatened to indict him in a 10-year -old case .
Even when Gately was eventually able to recruit another informant , a Colombian known by the pseudonym `` Javier Ramirez , '' a senior Justice Department official , Mary Lee Warren , pressed him to limit the operation 's scope , Gately and others said .
`` What she wanted to know was , when was this going to be over ? '' he recalled .
`` What was our endgame ? ''
In November 1995 , Colombian drug contacts introduced the undercover agents to Victor Alcala Navarro , a representative of Mexico 's biggest drug mafia , the so-called Juarez cartel .
The customs agents , posing as money launderers from a dummy company called Emerald Empire Corp. , began picking up the Mexican 's profits and laundering them as planned .
In February 1997 , at meetings in Mexico , Ramirez was introduced to Alcala 's boss .
A few months later , the customs informant found himself chatting by phone with the head of the cartel , Amado Carrillo Fuentes .
Over scores of meetings and million-dollar deals , the traffickers grew more open about the official protection they enjoyed in Mexico , law-enforcement officials and government documents indicate .
At one meeting in Mexico City on May 16 , 1997 , the traffickers brought along 16 federal police agents as bodyguards .
At another meeting , a man who identified himself as an official of the Mexican attorney general 's office picked up $ 1.7 million in cash , including $ 415,000 that the undercover agents had brought for the cartel boss himself .
During a later meeting in New York , Alcala told the agents that like Mexico 's drug-enforcement chief , who had been arrested for collaborating with the Juarez cartel , the defense minister , Cervantes , was in league with the competing Tijuana cartel .
Customs officials said they remained skeptical of what the agents heard , including the traffickers ' claim that Carrillo Fuentes had actually faked his own death in 1997 .
But in December 1997 , Ramirez invited Alcala to Colombia for an elaborately staged meeting that seemed to raise their partnership to a new level .
At a heavily guarded hacienda overlooking Bogota , an informant acting as Ramirez 's Colombian boss , Carlos , said he and his partners had $ 500 million of their own to launder .
They wanted to know whether the Mexican bankers used by Alcala 's boss , Juan Jose Castellanos Alvarez - Tostado , could help .
`` Alvarez called us right back , '' Gately recalled .
`` He said , ` Let me send you my very best people , and we will get it done . '
'' On March 6 , 1998 , Alcala arrived with several businessmen at the tastefully furnished offices of Emerald Empire in an industrial suburb of Los Angeles .
This time the businessmen brought a big deal of their own .
One of the men , David Loera , said he knew `` a general '' who had $ 150 million in Mexico City to invest .
Would Ramirez -- who had told the traffickers he owned part of a Nevada casino used to launder money -- care to help ?
Over the next six weeks , according to government documents and the accounts of Gately and several officials , the deal was discussed in three more meetings and three telephone conversations between Ramirez , the undercover agents and the traffickers .
All of the contacts were secretly tape-recorded and transcribed , officials said .
In one call , two senior investment managers at Mexico 's second-largest bank told the customs operatives that the money belonged not just to `` a general '' but to the minister of defense .
Later , the two Mexicans advised Ramirez that the minister was sending `` his daughter '' -LRB- a woman later said to be a friend -RRB- to meet with them , along with an army colonel and a third person .
However , the investment managers said , the amount to be laundered was much more than they had discussed : the minister had $ 500 million in cash in New York and another $ 500 million in the Netherlands , in addition to the $ 150 million in Mexico City .
Customs officials said they queried the CIA , which works closely with the Mexican military on drug-control and other programs .
The CIA responded tersely that they had no such information about Cervantes , an assessment that other officials have since reiterated .
But while Cervantes has not been a focus of suspicion , Mexican and American officials said several senior generals close to him have been under scrutiny by investigators from both the Mexican attorney general 's office and a special military intelligence unit .
On Feb. 6 , analysts at the Drug Enforcement Administration briefed Attorney General Janet Reno on intelligence indicating that senior Mexican generals might indeed be cooperating with Carrillo Fuentes ' organization , officials said .
And in a separate customs case in Houston , undercover agents had been approached about laundering millions of dollars for an unnamed Mexican army general , officials said .
On April 9 , Alcala visited Emerald Empire with a cousin , who had just returned from Mexico with a message .
`` He was very nervous about the deal , '' Gately said .
`` He said it could be very dangerous if it got screwed up , because the money belonged to ` all of them , including the president , ' '' Ernesto Zedillo .
-LRB- A spokesman for Zedillo , David Najera , dismissed the claim as baseless . -RRB-
Later that month , Gately went to Washington to brief officials including Kelly -- who was then about to take over the Customs Service after overseeing it as the Treasury Undersecretary for Enforcement .
`` Kelly said , ` How do we know it 's really him ? '
'' Gately recalled , referring to Cervantes .
`` I told him , ` We do n't know , ' '' Gately said .
`` ` We ca n't substantiate it .
But we have no reason to believe they 're telling us anything other than what they know . '
`` They were n't trying to impress us , they were trying to make deals with us , '' Gately added .
`` So whoever had this money , I thought it was worth pursuing -- whether it was the defense minister of Mexico or somebody we 'd never heard of . ''
People familiar with the discussions said they did not go much further .
The general 's supposed emissaries were to meet Ramirez in Las Vegas on April 22 .
They did not arrive , and the traffickers reported that they had gotten nervous .
Kelly acknowledged that he had been pressing for months to wrap up the investigation ; he said he had grown increasingly concerned that information about it might leak out , endangering the undercover agents .
The final sting had already been postponed twice because federal prosecutors were still preparing indictments .
James E. Johnson , who succeeded Kelly as undersecretary and has closely supervised Treasury 's relationship with Mexico on enforcement issues , added a cautionary note that several officials said seemed to underscore his concern for the political stakes .
Unless the agents had proof of Cervantes ' role , several officials quoted him as warning , they should not bandy his name about in connection with the case .
`` We need to be very careful about how we talk about this sort of thing , '' a senior law-enforcement official , who would not speak for attribution , quoted him as saying .
`` If we do n't have the goods , it makes us look like we 're overreaching . ''
Johnson would not comment publicly on the case .
The operation had already navigated a series of sizable obstacles .
Gately and some other agents were worried that their boss in Los Angeles , John Hensley , had leaked information about the secret operation to congressional aides and others ; Hensley had also pressed hard to bring the operation to an end , officials said .
For his part , officials said Hensley had accused his strong-willed subordinate of transgressions ranging from traveling without authorization to stealing millions of dollars .
Kelly acknowledged that the charges were investigated and found baseless ; Hensley declined any comment .
As discussions about the supposed $ 1.15 billion were going on , the undercover operation also suffered a serious setback with the capture of a key Juarez operative in Chicago .
The arrest brought money deliveries to a halt while the cartel hunted for a mole .
On Saturday , May 16 , more than two dozen Mexican traffickers , bankers and other operatives who had been invited to the United States by the undercover team were rounded up in San Diego and at the Casablanca Casino Resort in Mesquite , Nev .
And officials said whatever thoughts they had that the allegations about Cervantes might be pursued were dropped in the diplomatic backlash that followed .
While the Mexican authorities were asked to arrest about 20 suspects indicted in the case , they initially located only six .
One was the partner of Loera , the fugitive businessman who first proposed the deal with `` the general . ''
The partner was found dead in a Mexican jail from injuries that the police described as self-inflicted .
Alvarez - Tostado has never been found ; his deputy , Alcala , awaits trial in Los Angeles .
Soon after the operation , American officials said , they showed the Mexican government some of their information on apparent corruption in the case .
They said they kept silent about more explosive evidence to avoid exacerbating the furor that had broken out over their decision not to warn Mexico about the operation .
Still , the officials said that none of the information was ever pursued , and the Mexican attorney general , Jorge Madrazo Cuellar , obliquely dismissed the allegations in a little noticed statement issued last July .
Madrazo said in an interview that the Americans told him only about unnamed federal agents and a money laundering scheme involving `` a general who had a daughter . ''
He said the name of Cervantes , who has no daughter , was never mentioned .
`` With the information that they gave me , what could I possibly have done ? ''
Madrazo asked .
`` Gone and looked for a general with a daughter ? ''
