CARACAS , Venezuela --
The withdrawal of the United States from military bases in Panama , combined with the refusal of Venezuela 's new government to allow its airspace to be used for U.S. surveillance and pursuit flights , has created a huge gap in regional anti-drug interdiction that trafficking cartels are exploiting , say U.S. officials .
The weakness has emerged since May , when the United States returned Howard Air Base , from which 2,000 anti-drug flights a year had been operating , to Panama , as required by the Panama Canal Treaties .
Three alternate sites have been found , but they either are not yet able to function at full capacity or their effectiveness has been sharply limited by political considerations .
`` These are very clever people , and they are watching us very closely , '' Gen. Barry McCaffrey , director of the White House 's Office of National Drug Control Policy , said of the drug cartels during a four-nation South American tour in late July .
`` So if you have an enormous hole in the middle of the equation , it will have a fundamental change on the effectiveness of these solutions . ''
In a telephone interview from Washington , one Pentagon official expressed hope that `` by the end of the year , we should be up to 85 or 90 percent '' of the flight capacity that existed before the end of operations in Panama .
The official would not estimate the number of drug shipments now getting through as a result of the problem , but conceded that at the moment , interdiction efforts are `` not doing so well in the source zone . ''
Still , said Bruce Bagley , a professor at the University of Miami who is an expert on the Latin American drug trade , the United States `` is not without other assets that can be used , '' in the area , like satellite photography .
`` Although it is a setback , it is not a disaster , '' Bagley said of the Venezuelan policy .
`` Colombia is the principal focus of growing and processing cocaine now , and the lack of rights to overfly Venezuela does not inhibit efforts as significantly as many analysts in Washington have suggested . ''
Bagley said that although interdiction `` does n't work very well '' and is `` barely a holding action , '' the alternative is `` to do nothing , to give up . ''
Venezuela is not a grower of coca , the raw ingredient for cocaine , or heroin poppies .
But it shares a long , poorly patrolled border with Colombia , which produces 80 percent of the cocaine consumed in the United States , and more than 100 tons a year of that drug were estimated to have passed through Venezuela last year , before flights were banned .
The United States had hoped to negotiate an agreement with Panama that would have allowed the use of Howard into the next century .
But after announcing in December 1997 that such an accord had been reached , Panamanian President Ernesto Perez Balladares reneged .
In an effort to close the gap , the Netherlands in April agreed to grant the United States ground and air access to and use of selected airfields in the Dutch colonies of Aruba and Curacao , which lie just off the Venezuelan coast .
A similar agreement has been signed with Ecuador , which allows U.S. drug surveillance planes to fly from a military base in the coastal city of Manta .
The Manta flights are intended to monitor drug trafficking up the Pacific coast of South America to Mexico , which is the main drug route to the United States .
But the runway there is neither long enough nor can it take the weight of sophisticated electronic surveillance aircraft .
That makes flights from the two Dutch -held islands `` extremely important , '' a Pentagon official said .
Without overflight permission from Venezuela , though , the flights from Aruba and Curacao are of limited use .
`` We want this to be a truly multilateral effort , '' said Niek van Zutphen , the Dutch ambassador in Caracas , referring to aerial surveillance and interdiction .
`` If you leave one weapon so explicitly unused , you give yourself a handicap and make things very easy for the other side . ''
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez , a 45-year -old former army colonel who took office in February promising a social revolution , has stated explicitly that he will not countenance what he regards as a violation of his country 's sovereignty .
`` Venezuela is historically very zealous about everything occurring on these two islands , because we consider that it affects our national security , '' said Venezuelan Foreign Minister Jose Vicente Rangel in an interview .
He added : `` We cannot accept that planes leave from these bases , '' and said he `` absolutely ruled out '' any possibility that Venezuela will change its position .
Rangel noted that the Chavez government has cooperated with the United States in other areas of the anti-drug war , including the installation of three radar centers near Colombia or on drug routes and has `` captured more drugs in five months than were seized all of last year . ''
He also argued that Venezuela has the drug interdiction situation well under control and thus does not need outside interference .
`` We have complied with our responsibilities without any need for bases in Curacao and Aruba or overflights that we do not consider to be convenient , '' he said .
But McCaffrey said that since the closing of Howard , `` there have been seven criminal penetrations of Venezuelan airspace that have had unsuccessful endgames because there is no endgame in Venezuela . ''
Some key members of the U.S. Congress are growing impatient with the Venezuelan stance .
They warn that if Chavez 's position does not change soon , the United States could retaliate by refusing to certify that Venezuela is collaborating fully in the anti-drug war , a step that would deprive it of trade and other benefits .
`` If Venezuela is n't cooperative , and the amount of trafficking increases as a result of that , then it would certainly affect the certification process , '' said Rep. Benjamin Gilman , R - N.Y. , chairman of the House International Relations Committee .
`` Right now we are hard-pressed in our efforts , and until we are able to establish some alternative facilities , which is going to take quite a while , we will continue to have a major strategic gap , '' Gilman said .
But the Clinton administration is eager to avoid such a confrontation .
Venezuela has the largest oil reserves outside the Middle East and in recent years has become the United States ' principal source of imported oil .
Despite the public rebuffs they have received , U.S. officials remain hopeful that Chavez can be persuaded to change his mind .
Even before McCaffrey 's visit , State Department and other delegations sought to lay out the U.S. case to him , pointing out that drug traffickers are regularly violating the sovereignty he says he holds dear .
`` President Chavez has been so focused on politics and the economic situation that he frankly has n't spent a lot of time up to now on drug stuff , '' said a U.S. official who monitors the issue .
`` Our goal is to help him and his administration get oriented as to how we see the drug threat regionally and how it affects Venezuela specifically , and use that as a basis to move forward on cooperation . ''
