WASHINGTON --
The Central Intelligence Agency continued to work with about two dozen Nicaraguan rebels and their supporters during the 1980s despite allegations that they were trafficking in drugs , according to a classified study by the CIA .
The new study has found that the CIA 's decision to keep these paid agents , or to continue dealing with them in some less-formal relationship , was made by top officials at the agency 's headquarters in Langley , Va. , in the midst of the war waged by the CIA -backed Contras against Nicaragua 's leftist Sandinista government .
The new report by the CIA 's inspector general criticizes agency officials ' actions at the time for the inconsistent and sometimes sloppy manner in which they investigated -- or chose not to investigate -- the allegations , which were never substantiated by the CIA .
The inspector general 's report , which has not yet been publicly released , also concludes that there is no evidence that any CIA officials were involved in drug trafficking with Contra figures .
`` The fundamental finding of the report is that there is no information that the CIA or CIA employees ever conspired with any Contra organizations or individuals involved with the Contras for purposes of drug trafficking , '' one U.S. intelligence official said .
The new report is the long-delayed second volume of the CIA 's internal investigation into possible connections between the Contras and Central American drug traffickers .
The investigation was originally prompted by a controversial 1996 series in The San Jose Mercury - News , which asserted that a `` dark alliance '' among the CIA , the Contras and drug traffickers had helped finance the Contra war with millions of dollars in profits from drug smuggling .
The second volume of the report dismisses those specific charges , as did the first volume .
The Mercury - News series alleged that this alliance created a drug trafficking network that was the first to introduce crack cocaine into South Central Los Angeles .
The series prompted an enormous outcry , especially among blacks , many of whom said they saw it as confirmation of a government-backed conspiracy to keep blacks dependent and impoverished .
The Mercury - News subsequently admitted that the series was flawed and reassigned the reporter .
In the declassified version of the CIA 's first volume , the agency said the Mercury - News charges were baseless and mentioned drug dealers who had nothing to do with the CIA .
But John Deutch , the director of central intelligence at the time , had also asked the inspector general to conduct a broader inquiry to answer unresolved questions about the Contra program and drug trafficking that had not been raised in the Mercury - News series .
Frederick Hitz , then the CIA 's inspector general , decided to issue a second , much larger report to deal with those broader issues .
Many of the allegations in the second volume parallel charges that first surfaced in a 1987 Senate investigation .
The CIA is much more reluctant to publicly release the complete text of the approximately 500-page second volume than it was of the first , because it deals directly with Contras the CIA did work with .
According to the report , CIA officials involved in the Contra program were so focused on the fight against the leftist Sandinista regime that they gave relatively low priority to collecting information about the possible drug involvement of individuals in the Contra army .
The report concluded that CIA officers did report on drug trafficking by the Contras , but that there were no clear guidelines given to CIA officers in the field about how intensively they should investigate or act upon the allegations .
