HAVANA --
Despite the excitement over the Baltimore Orioles ' exhibition game here and the veneer of openness it conveys , American baseball comes to Cuba in a climate of heightened political repression .
A law passed this year tightens the reins on both dissent and press freedom and specifically makes it a crime to engage in conduct that supports American policy toward Cuba .
And despite the feel-good nature of an event that exemplifies the Clinton administration 's stated efforts to reach out to the Cuban people , the Orioles come less than three months after the president rejected bipartisan calls to review the 37-year -old trade embargo against Cuba and its failure so far to bring democratization here .
So when two prominent `` people to people '' exchanges -- the Orioles game and a joint concert by more than 100 Cuban and American artists -- play on Sunday , the backdrop will not be rapprochement but one of the chillier periods of the Cold War relationship between Cuba and the United States .
`` They 're pretty bad , '' an American official said of the relations .
`` They 're not trying to accomplish anything with us or do anything constructive at this point . ''
Jose Luis Toledo , a member of the National Assembly and dean of the law school at Havana University , concurred .
`` There 's no evolution in the relations , '' he said in an interview .
`` They are where they 've always been . ''
International human rights monitors said Cuba 's latest retrenching only served to underscore how little the situation has changed , even after Pope John Paul II , during his visit here last year , urged Cuba to open up to the world .
But perhaps because of the high expectations raised by the pope 's visit , the Cuban government now finds itself the target of international condemnation over its new curbs and the recent sentencing of four dissidents charged with sedition .
The crackdown is widely regarded as an attempt to assert control in response to growing internal dissent and in anger at the measures that the Clinton administration instituted last January in lieu of a fundamental re-evaluation of American policy .
Some steps taken by Washington , like allowing more dollars to flow to Cuba , aim at providing direct help to Cubans , but officials here argue that the true goal is destabilization .
In a message to the U.N. Human Rights Commission in Geneva , delivered on Wednesday and reprinted in full this week by the government newspaper Granma , Vice President Carlos Lage defended the crackdown , citing `` exceptional '' conditions caused by American efforts to `` destabilize the country and liquidate the socialist state . ''
`` At the time of judging Cuba and its revolution , it ca n't be forgotten that ours is not just any country , '' Lage said .
International rights monitors say such a reaction is to be expected , particularly when a government perceives a loss of control .
Cuba 's control has been slowly eroding because of increasing contacts with the outside world through family visits and tourism , and more access to dollars , which makes Cubans less economically dependent on the government .
`` The reaction of the regime is totally predictable . ''
said Jose Miguel Vivanco , executive director of the Americas division of Human Rights Watch in Washington .
`` The big challenge is to keep cool heads and keep going , trying to have a flexible policy toward Cuba and to pressure , in a concerted way , the Cuban government to improve human rights . ''
This week two groups , the Press Association , whose membership list stretches from Canada to Argentina , and the Committee to Protect Journalists , which is based in New York , cited Cuba as being among the worst violators of press freedoms .
Amnesty International says that the number of political prisoners in Cuba has declined but that at least 350 remain .
They include Vladimiro Roca , Felix A. Bonne , Rene Gomez Manzano and Marta B. Roque , who were sentenced this month to terms from 3 -LCB- to 5 years for sedition after issuing a document urging the Communist Party to allow political pluralism and an impartial legal system .
`` They should n't be in prison just for having an opinion , '' said Magaly de Armas , wife of Roca , who is 56 .
`` Vladimiro says his father always taught him to put his ideas into practice if he was sure of them , and to follow ideas , not men . ''
Roca is the son of a revolutionary leader , Blas Roca , who died in 1987 .
In a public response to the international uproar over the sentences , Cuban officials said in Granma that the four were sentenced not because of their opinions but because they served the goals of American officials by meeting with them , calling for a boycott of elections and other such `` subversive '' actions .
Laws passed last February to protect `` national independence and the economy of Cuba '' present critics of the government with ever harsher penalties .
While the anticrime segments , addressing new crimes like money laundering and stiffening penalties for drug trafficking and prostitution of minors , are accepted by many as necessary , another portion of the legislation has left dissidents and independent journalists with what one called `` psychological paralysis . ''
This section imposes sentences of 7 to 15 years on anyone who provides information `` to facilitate the objectives of the Helms - Burton law , the embargo and the economic war against our people '' -- basically , the American sanctions .
Fines and up to eight years in jail can now be imposed on those possessing or disseminating `` subversive '' American material .
Anyone collaborating with newspapers , radio , television and other `` foreign '' media to further the American goals faces as much as five years in jail .
`` The trick of this law is its ambiguity , '' said Raul Rivero , head of Cubapress , a news agency of 27 independent journalists who have continued working with American and other foreign news media .
`` The problem is you never know when you 're ` collaborating . '
Even a love letter could be interpreted that way . ''
In this climate of fear , the sports and cultural exchanges from the United States are going forward to impress American values on Cuban people directly , a senior Clinton administration official said .
The official said those and other contacts , like visits and remittances from Cuban - American relatives , have helped make Cubans less willing to accept their government .
But while many here regard the exchanges as positive , some Cubans said they expect no breakthrough .
`` The awareness is already there , '' noted Manuel Cuesta , secretary general of a social democratic organization whose goal is recognition as a political party .
`` That is why so many leave . ''
Vivanco , of Human Rights Watch , said the U.S. embargo , which is promoted with zeal by the politically influential , right-wing Cuban - American lobby , has divided the international community and prevented many countries that care about human rights from coalescing with the United States for a unified response to Cuba .
He said that is about the only pressure that could make the Cuban government budge .
But American officials say the embargo will remain as long as President Fidel Castro wants it lifted on his terms , without making any reforms .
At a construction site here where baseball was the topic of conversation one recent afternoon , workers turned laconic when asked whether they thought Sunday 's game , the first showdown between Cuba and an American Major League team since the revolution , would improve relations .
Finally one of them , Julio Martinez , a 34-year -old mason , spoke up and said : `` In the field of sports , we 're getting closer .
What it does in other fields I do n't know because that 's none of my business . ''
