The Clinton administration is quietly moving to expand contacts between the United States and Cuba , pressing a modest opening that largely sidesteps President Fidel Castro 's government .
With a series of small steps -- some announced earlier this year and others now being prepared -- the administration is mainly seeking to ease the hardships of the Cuban people and to allow certain Americans to visit Cuba , set up offices there and send money , food and medicine more freely .
In coming weeks , officials said , they will lift more restrictions on money transfers and travel and announce the start of direct charter flights between Havana and the New York metropolitan region and Los Angeles , in addition to those that now depart and land at Miami .
The moves have included a tentative new approach to the Cuban government .
On June 21 in Havana , U.S. and Cuban officials agreed to begin working more closely to combat a sharp rise in drug trafficking in and around the island , and they proposed other measures that American officials said could lead to greater cooperation .
The initiative falls well within the limits on American policy that were set in 1992 and 1996 by laws that stiffened the 37-year -old economic embargo on the island .
Some of the steps now being taken were postponed in the outcry after Cuban fighters shot down two civilian planes in 1996 , killing four Cuban - Americans who had planned to fly over Havana and leading to the 1996 law .
But the laws leave the White House considerable authority to widen American contacts with Cuba , and officials say they are resolved to make that happen .
`` There is a conscious decision in this administration to do what needs to be done , '' a senior official said .
Referring to Cuban - American opponents of Castro 's government , he added , `` This is a policy that has been held hostage to interest groups for way too long . ''
Some officials said the administration was already being pulled on Cuba policy between the legacy of President Clinton and the political aspirations of Vice President Al Gore .
Clinton is said by aides to see Washington 's approach to Cuba as archaic and ineffective .
Gore is described as highly aware of the considerable influence that Cuban - American voters may have in two pivotal states , Florida and New Jersey .
Yet other officials say however modest the recent measures , the shift is particularly significant because it reflects a widespread view in the administration that the domestic politics of dealing with Cuba are changing in fundamental ways .
A decade after the Cold War 's end , administration officials say they see the strength of conservative Cuban - American groups waning , while opposition to the embargo continues to grow among business people , farmers , religious groups and younger Cuban - Americans .
After years of waiting for some political opening in Cuba , American officials say , they are now determined to go forward , even if Castro responds by cracking down on dissent , as he did soon after Washington announced measures in January to increase contact between the two countries .
The Cuban response has even encouraged some American proponents of a hard-line policy to say that the so-called people-to-people initiative might help destabilize the Communist government by empowering the few dissidents on the island .
For its part , the administration sees the approach as a means of undercutting Cuba 's argument that it is under siege by the United States .
The new direction is also widely seen as a way to present a kinder American face to ordinary Cubans and , perhaps , to build a modicum of trust with younger Cuban officials who will become more important after the 72-year -old Castro passes from power .
The administration 's latest actions on Cuba recall an even more low-key White House effort in late 1995 and early 1996 .
Officials said that initiative , which focused more directly on the Cuban government , was approved by Clinton and managed by Sandy Berger , deputy national security adviser at the time .
It started with a relaxation of travel and other restrictions in October 1995 .
But according to current and former officials , the administration also choreographed a series of possible steps to ease American sanctions if Cuba continued to open up its economy and to promote a more cooperative relationship with the Cuban government .
`` We were trying to open the door -- to push it open if necessary -- and make it clear to the Cuban government that if they walked through that door , nothing bad would happen to them , '' one former official involved in the planning said .
Then as now , officials said , collaboration in antinarcotics efforts was high on the agenda .
In meetings with Cuban officials , U.S. officials raised the possibility of American law-enforcement training for Cuban police and border-guard officials , as well as the stationing of a representative of the Drug Enforcement Administration in Havana , officials said .
`` Narcotics was going to be a vehicle to get to other things , '' another former official involved in that initiative said .
`` The real question was what the next step would be . ''
Other proposals included encouraging American nongovernmental groups like environmental and human rights advocates to work in Cuba , some collaboration with the Cuban government on environmental issues and an exploration of how to initiate contacts abroad between military officers of the two countries .
Such efforts slammed to an abrupt halt in February 1996 when the civilian planes were shot down .
The next month , Congress passed the Helms - Burton law , codifying the embargo and adding sanctions .
Clinton signed the legislation over the advice of some senior aides and that November came surprisingly close to winning a majority of the Cuban - American vote in Dade County , Fla .
In recent months , the Treasury Department has begun to simplify the cumbersome procedures for travel to Cuba by Americans like researchers and athletes , aid workers and freelance journalists .
Similar consideration is most likely to be extended soon to others like students , artists and representatives of religious groups .
-LRB- BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- In March , the administration moved to streamline the sale and donation of medicines to Cuba , and next month , a Florida pharmaceutical company is to start shipping medicines to Cubans for benefactors in the United States .
Under federal rules that will take effect this month , Cuban emigres and others will be able to send money to Cubans by Western Union , reducing the cost of transfers that have been handled by travel agencies and other small businesses .
Americans can now send up to $ 300 to the island every three months , as long as the money does not go to senior government or Communist Party officials .
How much advantage Americans will take of the new rules remains to be seen .
A spokeswoman for the Treasury Department , Maria Ibanez , said travel to Cuba had steadily increased since the new regulations were issued in May .
The expected addition of direct charter flights from New York and Los Angeles is intended to accommodate that rise .
-LRB- END OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- Since baseball games in the spring between the Baltimore Orioles and the Cuban national team , the administration has offered proposals for other sports events .
Those plans have been set back , however , by differences over how to avoid generating revenue for the Cuban government , a State Department official said .
Over the past years , FBI counterterrorism officials have traveled to Havana to discuss the bombings of tourist hotels there , and weather experts from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration have met Cuban officials to discuss sharing information on hurricanes .
But the administration move last month to explore a more cooperative antidrug relationship with the Cuban government has run into stronger opposition , mainly from a few members of Congress , who say the Cuban authorities are involved in the drug trade .
Administration officials who have read a recent Central Intelligence Agency assessment of Cuba 's role said it concluded , to the contrary , that although traffickers in the Caribbean might have bought the complicity of low-level Cuban officials , there was no evidence of high-level drug corruption .
American officials also cite a series of incidents in recent years in which Cuban officials helped track down drug shipments , as well as one in which they even testified in a federal drug-smuggling case in the United States .
The United States and Cuba have communicated for some time by fax about suspicious boats and planes around the island .
At the meetings on June 21 in Havana , Cuban officials told State Department and Coast Guard representatives that they would speed up communications by using telephones and radios .
Cuba will not allow American ships to pursue suspected drug boats into Cuban waters , but will consider letting the Coast Guard station a drug-interdiction specialist at the American diplomatic mission in Havana and having Coast Guard experts join Cubans in searching large ships , administration officials said .
Although some officials said the administration 's new approach was gaining momentum , others predicted that it would increasingly be filtered through Gore 's presidential campaign .
Gore , the officials said , has taken a relatively hard line on Cuban policy in the past , playing a prominent role in the decision to suspend charter flights in 1994 .
`` If the administration wants to help Gore , they 're not going to push beyond the parameter of what they 're doing now , '' said Rep. Robert Menendez , D - N.J. , who also credited Gore with helping to defeat a proposal for a bipartisan commission to reassess Cuba policy .
`` If they push the envelope much further , '' Menendez said , `` I think you 'll see more negative reaction . ''
A spokesman for Gore , Tom Rosshirt , said the vice president supported a policy of building contacts with the Cuban people while maintaining economic pressure on the government .
Rosshirt declined to comment on specific advice that Gore has given Clinton on Cuba .
