WASHINGTON , February 6 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The United States and Mexico announced Friday a joint strategy to fight drug smuggling across the long U.S. - Mexican border .
The U.S. - Mexico Binational Drug Strategy seeks to strengthen police cooperation , increase the exchange of intelligence information on the activities of traffickers and facilitate their extradition for trial in the United States .
It also aims to step up the detection of money laundering and the seizure of drug cartel assets in either country , with the proceeds to be used to fund anti-drug operations .
`` This strategy is guided by the principle that drug trafficking and drug abuse are shared international threats and that we can only defeat them by acting in common , '' President Bill Clinton said in a written statement .
Clinton said the aim was to dismantle the drug cartels , reduce demand for drugs in the United States and remove the obstacles to law enforcement cooperation with Mexico .
`` This strategy is guided by the principle that drug trafficking and drug abuse are shared international threats and that we can only defeat them by acting in common , with our other international partners , '' he added .
`` Our common efforts will uphold the sovereignty and rule of law which drug trafficking organizations seek to erode , '' Clinton added .
U.S. drug officials estimate Americans every year consume 30 billion U.S. dollars worth of cocaine , most of which comes from Colombia and enters the United States from Mexico , along with Mexican -made heroin and marijuana .
The powerful Mexican drug cartels that took over the cocaine traffic from Colombians have sown violence throughout northern Mexico and over the U.S. border in recent years .
U.S. law enforcement officials say they cannot win the drug war without the collaboration of the Mexican police , a force that has been dogged by scandals over payoffs from the drug trade .
In the fiscal year 1999 budget , Clinton proposed an increase of nearly 500 million U.S. dollars to over 5.8 billion for drug demand reduction , the largest total ever .
`` Working with Mexico and our other partners in the hemisphere , we are developing new ways to strengthen multilateral efforts against drugs , to promote the synergies that can bolster our success , '' Clinton said .
