Expect more of the latter --
`` flagpole sitting '' as Roland calls it -- aboard the international space station .
The first component is supposed to be launched in November after a year 's delay caused by the cash-strapped Russians .
Story Musgrave , who led the courageous 1993 spacewalking mission to fix Hubble , is upset that up to dlrs 80 billion is being committed to operate the space station for 15 years .
`` We have committed those future resources to Earth orbit .
To Earth orbit , '' Musgrave repeats .
`` Not to reach and not to quest , not to the big telescopes , not to the big planetary missions , not to planetary exploration . ''
`` It is really that kind of stuff that really touches to the core ... you know , the cosmic story . ''
Glenn , however , is characteristically cautious .
`` I 'm not one of those who just think we ought to just drop everything and try to go to Mars .
It would be enormously expensive , '' he says .
`` Just trying to run a program on nothing but seeing how far and fast and high we can go as an objective in itself , that does n't benefit you and me and other people right here on Earth . ...
The space station is the way we should be going .
It 's a very logical next step . ''
Roland argues NASA should use more rocket-launched robots because too much is spent on human space flight -- dlrs 500 million per shuttle mission -- and not enough on communications and weather satellites and science probes .
If shuttles have become ho-hum , to many earthlubbers , other space exploration continues to enthrall .
Witness Cassini winging its way toward Saturn .
Or Galileo orbiting Jupiter and scrutinizing its icy moon , Europa .
Or Mars Global Surveyor and Lunar Prospector circling their respective globes .
Or Ulysses looping around for yet another look at the sun 's poles .
The Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous spacecraft , NEAR , will catch up with asteroid Eros in January and swing around it .
And this weekend , Deep Space 1 , the first spacecraft in NASA 's New Millennium program , is to be launched to asteroid 1992 KD to test the solar-electric-powered ion-propulsion engine and the promise it holds for beating space travel 's great enemies -- time and distance .
`` We ca n't keep firing big rockets and just coasting to Mars , or coasting to Jupiter , or coasting someplace .
You have to get there faster , '' says Curtis Cleven , deputy spacecraft systems manager for Deep Space 1 .
Diminutive Pluto is the last unexplored planet in the solar system .
NASA hopes to get there by about 2015 , using conventional technology .
Those who prefer machines to men in space point to little Sojourner , the poster robot for NASA 's faster-cheaper-better campaign .
Pathfinder 's July 4 , 1997 , landing on Mars , and Sojourner 's subsequent encounters with rocks named Yogi , Barnacle Bill and Scooby Doo , captivated the home planet .
Millions worldwide tuned in on TV and the Internet -LRB- courtesy of those boring old satellites -RRB- as the toylike rover rolled from stone to stone before losing steam .
NASA plans to launch more Mars orbiters and landers between December and 2003 .
The Big Mission , the one to bring back Martian soil and rocks , is targeted to lift off in 2005 .
The samples , enough to fill at least one soda can , would arrive at Earth in 2008 and perhaps settle the question of whether life ever existed on Mars .
That answer likely wo n't come from the potato-sized Martian meteorite that NASA researchers still claim contains fossilized remains of bacterialike animals .
The evidence just is n't there , many scientists contend .
It 's enough , though , for author Ray Bradbury to dust off his 1950 classic , `` The Martian Chronicles '' and write a screenplay for Universal .
`` We get excited about what we think is a Martian rock but we 're not sure .
Well then , let 's use this curiosity and put it into building a team to actually go to Mars , '' Bradbury says .
His `` The Martian Chronicles '' put astronauts on Mars in February 1999 .
Now he laments : `` I get depressed when I think of the lack of real action . ''
NASA figures the earliest anyone could go to Mars is 2012 , given sufficient government funding , which is extremely unlikely at present .
A trip to Mars would take six to eight months each way .
Bradbury thinks a space station is needed on the moon , and that the space program is focused too much on the shuttles .
