LOS ANGELES
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- The plutonium-powered Cassini spacecraft flew within 728 miles of Earth 's surface , successfully using the planet 's gravity to gain speed and change direction for the final stretch of its journey to Saturn .
NASA 's most expensive unmanned spacecraft made its closest approach to Earth late Tuesday , arriving within three miles of its target and six-tenths of a second late -- all within an acceptable margin of error .
`` It was right by the book , '' said Bob Mitchell , Cassini 's program manager at NASA 's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena .
But concern over the safety of nuclear-powered spacecraft are not likely to diminish as the $ 3.4 billion Cassini speeds away .
Anti -nuclear activists plan to protest any future missions that use radioactive materials .
`` The odds are with space technology you 're going to have an accident sooner or later , '' said Bruce Gagnon of the Global Network Against Weapons and Nuclear Power in Space .
`` God forbid it 's on a mission with plutonium . ''
Activists had feared that human error or some other mishap could fling Cassini and its 72 pounds of radioactive plutonium into Earth 's atmosphere .
A handful of demonstrations took place in June to protest the flyby , but most activists conceded nothing could be done to prevent it .
Before Cassini 's launch , protesters filed lawsuits and threatened to chain themselves to the pad .
NASA experts said there was only a 1-in-1.2 million chance of accidental re-entry .
And even if that happened , the plutonium was well-protected , they said .
The robotic probe reached its closest point over the southeastern Pacific Ocean as expected at 8 : 28 p.m .
The spacecraft 's closest point was nearly 110 times higher than commercial jets normally cruise .
The swingby was designed to give the spacecraft momentum for the remainder of its trip , and the mission would have been impossible without the gravity assistance of Earth and other planets , Mitchell said .
Cassini has twice used the gravity of Venus to increase its speed since its launch in October 1997 .
In December 2000 , it will swing by Jupiter for a final push toward Saturn and its moons , which the probe will study for four years beginning in 2004 .
NASA has used `` gravity assists '' of Earth and Venus since 1973 to fling other spacecraft to their destinations , including the successful -- and plutonium-powered -- Galileo probe to Jupiter .
Galileo twice flew close to Earth without incident .
Cassini does n't use the plutonium for propulsion but to power its dozen instruments .
Heat from the naturally decaying element is converted into electricity in the craft 's three nuclear batteries .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Once it arrives at Saturn , Cassini will make close-up studies of the planet , its rings , moons and magnetic environment .
It also will release a European Space Agency probe named Huygens , which will parachute to the surface of Titan , Saturn 's biggest moon .</ENAMEX>
