MOSCOW --
Considering Russia 's deep economic troubles , it will be the shot the world never quite expected to hear .
On Friday -LRB- Nov .
20 -RRB- , a Russian Proton rocket is scheduled to blast off carrying the first component of the world 's grandest peacetime project , the International Space Station .
The space complex , to be assembled in earth 's orbit , will take nearly six years to complete by a consortium of 16 nations .
Although the greatest burden -- both technically and financially -- is being carried by the United States .
The unmanned Zarya module will be launched from Russia 's version of Cape Canaveral , the launch site at Baikonur , in the former Soviet republic of Kazakhstan .
Zarya , which will provide power for the fledgling station , was built in Russia with American assistance and financed with $ 190 million from NASA .
Like the first piece in a giant erector set , Zarya -LRB- Russian for `` sunrise '' -RRB- will be added to in coming years with components brought by U.S. shuttles and Russian rockets .
The result in 2004 will be a 460-ton station stretching the length of two football fields .
The final construction costs could top $ 40 billion .
Friday 's scheduled launch is a milestone that did not come easily .
Russia 's economic crisis forced delays .
NASA was compelled to pledge a face-saving bailout of $ 660 million to complete Russian construction of a living-quarters service module to be launched next year .
Critics fear it is merely the first of many problems to come and the result of a space policy based on international politics rather than American scientific aims .
Already the space station is 18 months behind schedule , largely due to Russia 's economic problems .
`` There are certainly more problems involved in doing it this way .
But it is worth it .
International cooperation succeeds because we share the burdens and we share the benefits .
It 's a small planet , and it is getting smaller , '' said Mike Baker , a shuttle astronaut and head of NASA 's human space flight program office in Moscow .
Historically , Russia has been the leader in space endurance flights , beginning in 1971 ? with its Salyut series of space stations and since 1986 with Mir .
With the country 's economy a wreck and future funding for their space program in doubt , the Russians are sensitive about their role playing second fiddle to NASA .
`` Within a year or even less , three modules will be in orbit and then few people will recall these problems , '' said Alexei Krasnov of the Russian Space Agency .
Ironically , America 's efforts toward a space station began in 1984 , when it was proposed by President Reagan not long after he branded the Soviet Union the `` evil empire '' and initiated research on Star Wars , the high-tech plan for an orbital defense against nuclear missile attack .
But the Cold War ended with the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 , and America and Russia became co-dependent partners -- the United States had the money and space shuttle ; the Russians had space-station experience aboard Mir .
Despite the problems that have bedeviled the 12-year -old Mir , or perhaps because they have been overcome , space remains one of the few arenas in which Russians can proudly point out their achievements .
`` In the field of manned space missions , they are at the very top because of their experience with Mir and the previous space stations .
It is experience that nobody else in this world has , '' said Alain Fournier - Sicro , director of the Moscow office of the European Space Agency .
The first phase of the International Space Station actually began in 1995 , when American astronauts started living aboard Mir. Seven U.S. astronauts spent almost 27 months on the station , gaining technical and operational experience .
Perhaps more importantly , they learned how the Russians worked -- desperately mending the problem-plagued station and taking risks that some American officials felt were too high .
James Oberg , a former space engineer and author , claims America is playing `` Russian roulette '' by committing itself to cooperation at a time when the Russian space program is crumbling .
In 1989 , the Russian civilian space budget was $ 3.2 billion , according to the Russian Space Agency .
`` Now our state budget is like that of a Third World country , '' said Yuri Koptev , head of the Russian Space Agency .
`` Not in a single year have we got the money we were promised .
We 're getting one-fourteenth of what we got in 1989 . ''
`` The situation is not good , obviously , '' NASA 's Baker said in an interview with Cox News Service .
`` They keep telling us they will keep up their commitments .
Time will tell . ''
-LRB- EDs : Story can end here .
Optional add follows . -RRB-
Finances aside , multinational cooperation has generated world-class headaches .
There are myriad details and construction schedules to coordinate in America , Russia and other countries , astronaut training to conduct and shuttle and rocket launches to plan .
And cumbersome language barriers to contend with as engineers and astronauts often must work via interpreters .
The Russian Space Agency and NASA even had difficulty deciding when and whether to hold a pre-launch press conference this week .
But on a grand scale , the International Space Station is the stuff of pre- Space Age fantasy .
The result will be a maze-like station circling the globe and inhabited by an international team of astronauts and scientists working for the welfare of humankind .
Some officials suggest it will pave the way for a manned mission to Mars later in the 21st century .
Four space station crews are now in training , spending about 60 percent of their time at the Johnson Space Center in Houston and the rest at the Russian space training facilities at Star City , near Moscow .
`` It is irrational to duplicate efforts , senseless not to unite our experience and resources , '' said German Titov , Russia 's second man in space and now a member of parliament .
`` Space is there for everybody .
Let 's make one international system for everyone 's use . ''
ENDIT
