The world is entering into a bold new phase of space exploration -- somewhat quietly .
In recent years , public interest has waned .
Not that space probes and space flight have become commonplace , but the keen excitement of our love affair with space has diminished .
Back in the 1960s and ' 70s citizens across the nation took time out of their busy lives to watch America 's rocket launches on television .
When 77-year -old John Glenn returned to space as one of the crew in the shuttle Discovery last month , interest peaked momentarily .
But few people watched the shuttle Endeavor lift off from the Kennedy Space Center on Dec. 4 to rendezvous with the orbiting Russian -made control module .
Endeavor carried a docking port to connect with the control module , the first two major components of an international Earth orbiting space station .
American astronauts and Russian cosmonauts and 14 other nations have been working together to build the orbiting station .
It will be used for long-term space experiments and as a space outpost for exploration into the far reaches of space .
Nearly 100 more important components will be added in the next five years before the space station is completed .
At that point , it will weigh approximately one million pounds and span two football fields .
On Friday , NASA 's unmanned spacecraft , the Mars Climate Orbiter , rocketed into space headed for Mars and will reach it next September .
In early January , the Mars Polar Lander will be sent to burrow into the Red Planet and analyze its soil .
The polar lander will track the movement of water vapor and dust across Mars .
The orbiter will relay that information back to Earth .
NASA now plans to send a pair of unmanned spacecraft to Mars every two years for the next decade .
It wo n't be long before the first explorers will travel from the space station to the Red Planet and back .
And a new age of exploration will have begun -- one that will far exceed dreams and accomplishments of the seafaring explorers of the 1400s .
