-LRB- Distributed by New York Times Special Features -RRB- For at least the next five years , NASA 's Cassini spacecraft , six tons of brute technology laboriously wending its way to Saturn and its giant moon Titan , will serve nicely as a bloated billboard with this message : The era of big , unmanned space missions is over .
Not only did the craft 's considerable heft force an impressively circuitous route that depends on the gravitational pull of three heavenly bodies , but its $ 2 billion cost clashed ominously with the U.S. space agency 's shrinking budget .
Just as the extinction of the dinosaurs cleared a place for little , lithe mammals , so the termination of huge missions like Cassini will create opportunities for petite but powerful explorers .
Under strict orders from NASA administrator Daniel Goldin , whose mantra is `` better , faster , cheaper , '' the agency is moving toward ideas reminiscent of science-fiction novels -- robots that could fit on a spoon , solar sails and rockets no larger than a computer chip .
The technologies will be seen in the real world surprisingly soon .
At the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena , Calif. , ground zero for NASA 's tightened focus , a tiny rover called MUSES - CN symbolizes the merits of miniaturization .
MUSES resembles a drastically downsized version of Sojourner , the remote-control chariot that enchanted the public two summers ago as it rolled across Mars .
The reduced rover measures just six inches long and weighs 42 ounces .
Its size will allow it to ride piggyback on the already-planned Japanese MUSES - C probe , to be launched at the asteroid Nereus in 2002 .
MUSES is only a beginning .
Rover mastermind Brian Wilcox is developing tiny rovers that weigh no more than a few ounces .
Another little buggy may ride aboard the Near - Earth Asteroid Prospector -- history 's first privately funded deep-space probe .
The European Space Agency is working on ROSA , a six-wheeled robot designed to tackle the worst terrain Mars has to offer .
Other exotic vehicles are in the works at JPL as well , such as a `` subsurface explorer '' -- a 2-inch-wide rod with a pressurized gas-driven hammer that burrows eagerly underground .
The spacecraft that fly the rovers are likewise dieting .
Barry Hebert 's micro-spacecraft group at JPL is building radically downsized vehicles , weighing as little as two pounds .
Several could fly into space on top of a single inexpensive Pegasus missile .
They could then `` set up a virtual network -- a kind of Internet in space , '' Hebert says .
Networking would allow coordinated activities such as observing an asteroid from all sides at once or building a complex telescope that could reveal details far too fine -- even for the Hubble Space Telescope .
Hebert promises test flights of his miniature spacecraft within the next couple of years .
Featherweight spacecraft are a perfect fit with solar-sail propulsion .
Radiation from the sun could accelerate a huge but very thin light collector to extremely high speeds .
Later this year , the space shuttle may carry a solar sail into Earth orbit to prove the concept works .
A few technological visionaries , such as inventor Forrest Bishop of the Institute of Atomic - Scale Engineering , are planning machines that can travel to other star systems and reconfigure themselves molecule by molecule .
Once they reach their target , they will seek out raw materials , build sensors and an antenna , then relay images back home .
NASA scientists , staring at tight funding restrictions , dare not embrace such dreaming .
But that does n't bother Bishop .
`` In the long term , '' he says , `` space will become a private venture .
Bureaucrats are not going to colonize the solar system . ''
_______ -LRB- Corey S. Powell is Discover magazine 's Senior Editor , Online . -RRB-
-0-
