BOULDER , Colo. --
The 750 people assembled here this week for the founding convention of an organization called the Mars Society have a vision -- and they 're not about to wait for the US government , or anybody else , to make it happen .
The vision is of humans exploring Mars and establishing a permanent outpost there to conduct research on the most Earth -like world known outside mankind 's home planet .
Robert Zubrin , the society 's founder , believes a full-scale human mission could get people to Mars to begin building a permanent base within 10 years , if President Clinton decides quickly to go ahead .
But if the Clinton administration or the one that takes office in 2001 fails to declare that goal , Zubrin and his followers have a backup plan .
They hope to begin a series of privately funded ventures concerning the red planet -- culminating , if need be , in a completely independent mission to send the first humans to Mars .
Zubrin , a former engineer at Lockheed Martin who left to start his own rocket company , said that sending humans to Mars is inevitable , and that it is a crucial step toward revitalizing the human spirit and imagination by opening up not just a new frontier but , literally , a whole new world .
`` The purpose of the society is going to be to push for the human exploration of Mars , by both public and private means , '' he said in an interview .
But he acknowledged that a private mission would , at best , take far longer to get going than a government effort , so for now the society plans to push to get the United States , or an international group , to go ahead with the first effort to send people beyond Earth 's orbit since the Apollo lunar missions ended in 1972 .
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration has done preliminary planning for how to design an exploration program that could get people to Mars by 2014 , without spending more money than the space program 's present budget .
But in the absence of a presidential go-ahead , the agency can do little to move toward that goal .
Public interest in human Mars exploration may be at an all-time high , Zubrin said , in the wake of the controversial but still not disproved announcement in 1996 of possible signs of ancient life inside a meteorite from Mars , and of last year 's highly successful and wildly popular robotic Mars Pathfinder mission .
And the first presidential administration of the new millennium would present a uniquely opportune time for a Kennedy -like declaration of a national push toward Mars , he said .
`` It 'll be a time for new beginnings , '' Zubrin said .
`` I think people are going to be looking outward . ''
Zubrin , whose book `` The Case for Mars , '' co-authored by Northampton -based freelance writer Richard Wagner , outlines a scenario for getting people to Mars quickly and at much lower cost than under NASA plans , sees the society as a way to educate the public and to lobby political leaders .
The society has already enlisted a wide following of space enthusiasts , including most of the members of an informal group who call themselves the `` Mars Underground '' and who have been pressing for increased Mars exploration for the last 20 years .
Few seem to take seriously the idea that a private group like this fledgling society could actually mount its own mission -- though some here are so firmly anti- NASA that they seem to hope that it will turn out that way .
But nearer-term goals such as funding a scientific experiment that could be carried `` piggyback '' atop an existing robotic probe to Mars seem more likely to be within the group 's potential grasp .
The society is actively looking into such possible payloads , as well as the idea of funding a research base in the Canadian Arctic that would simulate a human Mars base .
It could provide a place to test equipment and methods for eventual use on the planet , as well as to learn about the psychological factors that might affect a crew working in extreme isolation and harsh conditions .
And a private mission , while clearly a long shot , is not out of the question , some analysts say .
John Connoly , who works for NASA , said a private mission is possible if wealthy individuals or companies decided to provide the funding .
`` Bill Gates could do it personally .
And other people and companies have the wealth to do private missions , '' he said .
`` I would love to see someone step forward and make that challenge . ''
