Whether it is the triumphant return of a true American Hero , one small step for mankind 's knowledge of the biological effects of aging and spaceflight , or just a cynical political payoff , one thing is clear : John Glenn 's scheduled return to orbit this week has prompted what may be an unprecedented round of reflection and soul-searching about the past and future of the US space program and of humanity 's four-decade -old reach for the stars .
And , to some extent , it has brought back a taste of the kind of excitement and suspense that used to accompany every venture into space .
To some , the flight of the oldest person ever to leave the grip of Earth 's gravity signals the dawn of a new era in space , when ordinary folks will soon be able to line up for a ticket to a realm so far reserved for `` right stuff '' ex-military pilots , dedicated space scientists , and the occasional legislator on a junket .
But to others , it is an illustration of just how badly the nation has failed to progress in the nearly three decades since humans first left their footprints on the moon 's dusty landscape -- the culmination of a hugely ambitious national quest that began with Glenn 's five hours in space .
The return to orbit of the first American ever to reach that pinnacle , in the same month that the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is celebrating its 40th birthday , ca n't help but set people to thinking back to that white-knuckled morning in 1962 -- and about how some things have changed , and others have failed to , in the years since then .
`` Thirty -six years after sending John Glenn into orbit , NASA has finally achieved the capability to send John Glenn into orbit , '' is the cynical summation given by Rick Tumlinson , president of an advocacy group called the Space Frontier Foundation that promotes widespread access to space for ordinary people .
`` NASA 's decision to fly him again shows that the government-run space program is just going around in circles . ''
Buzz Aldrin , the second person ever to set his feet on lunar soil -- just moments after Neil Armstrong 's footprints were etched indelibly into history -- agrees that the space program has been suffering from the lack of any overriding , widely supported goal and vision ever since President John F. Kennedy 's objective of landing on the moon and returning safely to Earth was achieved in 1969 .
But Aldrin thinks he knows what the space agency , the nation , and the human race should be doing now on the frontier of space , and he believes that most people would agree -- if only the president , some president , would stand up as Kennedy did and declare where the future lies .
In a word , Mars .
Aldrin , like most people who favor human exploration of space , sees the red planet as the obvious next goal : It is , after all , the only other world we know of that has some of the key resources -LRB- water , oxygen , soil -RRB- to help sustain a human settlement , and where permanent , self-sustaining colonies are ultimately a possibility .
After the Apollo buildup years when NASA consumed 4 percent of the national budget , `` they thought it was going to continue that way , '' Aldrin said -- and the agency 's managers and supporters were astonished and unprepared when President Richard M. Nixon pulled the plug , calling off ambitious NASA plans for a space station and a human landing on Mars by 1984 .
Ever since then , the biggest excitement in the space program has come mostly from the much less expensive robotic missions that have been conducting a Lewis and Clark -like exploration of our neighboring planets , gradually filling in the blanks on our solar system maps .
The human space program , meanwhile , has consisted of nothing more than now-routine flights to low- Earth orbit to launch commercial or military satellites or conduct scientific research .
Until Glenn 's flight , most people were n't paying attention and the television networks were seldom even broadcasting missions that were , in essence , boldly going again where many have gone before .
`` It is really critical that we look ahead now at where we want to be in 20 years or so , so that does n't happen again , '' Aldrin said during a recent visit to Boston .
`` The program is in transition , '' said John Logsdon , head of the Space Policy Institute at George Washington University .
`` It 's not heroic anymore .
It may be interesting , but nobody 's exploring new frontiers or doing things for the first time .
There 's absolutely nothing exciting about going around in circles . ''
And that is where we will be for years to come , Logsdon said .
`` We have this thing to get through , called the International Space Station , '' whose first component is to be launched aboard a Russian rocket next month , and whose assembly is expected to consume the time , cargo capacity , and efforts of most US and Russian piloted missions for the next several years .
Not that it will not be useful .
Logsdon agrees that it is `` an appropriate step , '' and most analysts feel that it will be a useful laboaratory for learning about how humans respond to the long stays in space that planetary exploration will require .
But it is certainly not the kind of project that will build Apollo -like public excitement .
That space station , costing well over $ 3 billion per year , `` has to be up and operating before there can be any serious national commitment to anything beyond it , '' Logsdon said .
`` NASA has to show the country , the leadership , the world that it can get through this program . ''
And there are plenty of doubters .
House Speaker Newt Gingrich last month lambasted NASA 's space station planning -- and , indeed , the agency 's entire operation -- although he stopped short of calling for the station 's cancellation .
`` The space station now is a mess , '' he said after NASA chief Daniel Goldin presented a request for $ 660 million in extra funding , to help bail out the cash-strapped Russians to ensure that their long-delayed but crucial sections of the station will finally be delivered .
Rather than call for the agency to scale back its overall plans , Gingrich suggested that NASA has not been ambitious enough .
NASA `` has done a spectacular job of slowing down the rate in which we 've gotten into space , '' he said .
If not for the `` cumbersome , bureaucratic '' ways of the agency , he suggested , `` there is no reason today we are n't permanently on the moon . ''
It is not clear , though , that there is any public groundswell of support for grander missions .
Indeed , say many analysts , American support for space exploration has been fairly tepid -- and consistently so .
`` The glass has been between half-full and half-empty all along , '' said John Pike , a space policy analyst with the Washington -based Federation of American Scientists .
Polls have consistently shown that only about half the public thought the space program was worth the money -- except for a brief blip in July of 1969 , the month of the first moon landing , when those numbers briefly went over 50 percent , but not by much , he said .
`` The recollection of it being wildly popular has more to do with how the broadcast media was organized , '' Pike said .
In those days , if all three networks chose to show a launch , viewers had few other choices .
`` It seemed to be popular because Walter Cronkite told us it was popular , '' he said .
Still , there is no denying the intensity of the popular excitement that missions like Glenn 's orbital flight and the first moon landing generated .
The astronauts were at least as popular and celebrated in the 1960s as any movie or rock star is now , as the ticker-tape parades and emotional throngs that greeted them attested .
The question that those who advocate a new era of large-scale exploration ask is , can that level of excitement ever happen again ?
