Lean , mean and ready to do things differently , Daniel Goldin came to the office of NASA administrator seven years ago as a crusader eager to shake up an agency adrift in failure and mediocrity .
His mantra was `` faster , cheaper , better . ''
No more behemoths that cost many billions of dollars apiece would be built to explore outer space .
Instead , he vowed to tap American ingenuity to build swarms of small but powerful spacecraft that would probe the heavens , sending back a nearly constant stream of new information .
Today , about $ 100 billion later , the revolution that Goldin engineered is in a crisis .
It has suffered its worst blows yet with the loss in recent months of a pair of Mars craft -- an orbiter and a lander with two innovative surface probes the size of cantaloupes .
Still , there is surprising agreement among NASA officials and leaders in space exploration that despite its current troubles , the agency is on course .
Goldin , 59 , the longest continuously serving head of NASA , is zealous , even as he appoints blue-ribbon panels to investigate the current problems .
He says he is chastened by failure but unbowed in his tenets .
`` We got set back , '' he said of the Mars failures in an interview .
`` But we 'll pick ourselves up , dust ourselves off , and we 're going to rock this world .
The revolution continues . ''
He said that his initiatives had not only produced dozens of successes in space exploration -- discovering new worlds and probing many others , from the moon to the galactic maternity wards where stars are born -- but had also saved taxpayers at least $ 40 billion .
A half-dozen space leaders seemed to echo Goldin 's judgment .
In a series of interviews , they said his revolution is basically sound , if shaken .
Plans for the Mars program , shattered by disaster , are in flux .
But no expert foresaw big changes in the principles of `` faster , cheaper , better , '' or a need for anything more than relatively minor adjustments in what some call Capt. Dan 's star trek .
Indeed , some analysts said that the voyage is just beginning to pick up speed and that big advances lie ahead .
`` We fell into cutting too many corners , '' said John Beckman , head of the systems division at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena , Calif. , which designed the recently lost spacecraft .
`` But the basic process is not broken .
There 's still a lot to be gained from increasing our efficiency .
I really do believe that we 've barely scratched the surface in terms of what 's possible . ''
Claude Canizares , chairman of the space studies board at the National Academy of Sciences and director of the Center for Space Research at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , agreed , saying that on balance the revolution 's troubles were worth the benefits .
`` It 's possible that the pendulum has swung too far , '' he said .
`` But you can argue that , given the realities of human nature , this was bound to happen and it 's not wholly a bad thing .
It helps you define the limits .
Hopefully we can learn from that in terms of best practices , rather than learning as in a tribunal . ''
John Logsdon , director of the Space Policy Institute at George Washington University , was the most critical , saying that penny pinching had pushed many teams to the breaking point .
`` There 's a balance between science return , acceptance of risk and cost reduction , '' he said .
`` Those have gotten out of balance , with too much emphasis on cost reduction .
But the idea of doing missions more rapidly and at lower cost certainly is still valid .
The issue is how rapidly and how much cost reduction . ''
The general upbeat appraisal for `` faster , cheaper , better '' is all the more remarkable given a rash of failures that began in 1997 and reached a crescendo in past weeks .
-- Two Earth -observing craft , Lewis and Clark , failed in orbit in 1997 and in production in 1998 , victims of instrument problems , testing delays , rising costs and control-system flaws .
-- In December 1998 , the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous spacecraft missed its meeting with Eros , a potato-shaped rock 25 miles long .
It is to try again next year .
-- The telescope on the Wide - Field Infrared Explorer satellite lost its protective cover shortly after launch last March , letting coolant escape into space and ruining the astronomy mission .
-- In September , a mix-up between English and metric units in navigation data sent the Mars Climate Orbiter off course and probably plummeting into the red planet in fiery death .
-- This month , the Mars Polar Lander , consisting of a traditional probe with retrorockets as well as two small hitchhikers meant to smash into the planet at 400 mph and survive to send back data , fell silent as it neared touchdown .
After the latest failures , NASA promised a `` major rethinking '' of the strategy for the Mars program , which could include a two-year delay in the next landing effort , planned for launching in 2001 .
Despite the ominous cast of recent events , more than one analyst noted that there have been many more successes than failures .
Winners include spacecraft that have studied the moon , the sun , an asteroid , the Earth 's magnetosphere , interstellar clouds , interplanetary dust and distant stars , and new kinds of engines for advanced spacecraft .
The Mars Pathfinder mission in 1997 became a global sensation as its plucky little robot , Sojourner , rolled across the Martian soil , analyzing rocks and sending back stunning photographs .
Howard McCurdy , a space historian at American University who is working on a book about the Goldin revolution , noted that the total cost of 16 small missions was about the same as the Cassini spacecraft , a $ 3.3 billion colossus of the old school now on its way to Saturn .
`` That 's why it 's so attractive , '' he said of the revolution .
`` You can do 16 missions for price of one .
`` Yeah , '' McCurdy added , `` you lose maybe 20 percent but you 're still ahead . ''
The NASA program that is hard to shrink dramatically for safety reasons , he said , is that of human spaceflight , including the nation 's fleet of space shuttles and the international space station taking shape in orbit .
Their costs , McCurdy said , dwarf those of the satellites and probes and account for roughly half the NASA budget , which this year is $ 13.6 billion .
Joseph Burns , a planetary scientist at Cornell University , said the Goldin revolution had considerable merit but was failing to come to grips with future big-ticket exploratory goals that were inherently hard to do fast and cheap .
Examples he cited were `` a serious search '' for life on Mars and a major voyage to the outer solar system , where icy planets and comets hold many clues of creation .
`` A lot of people would still like to do that , '' he said of a trek to the dark fringes of the sun 's realm .
Goldin said his agenda was expanding , not contracting , and that by design it could continue to embrace risk and failure .
If NASA has 10 winners out of 10 tries , he said , `` we have mediocre goals . ''
Conversely , he added , if two or three ambitious tries fail while seven or eight succeed , that `` would be unbelievable success . ''
Revolution is difficult but rewarding , he said .
Most important , `` it goes on . ''
