WASHINGTON --
President Clinton dismissed suggestions Wednesday that NASA should scale back space exploration after the space agency 's recent loss of two unmanned spacecraft destined for Mars .
Referring to failed missions in which astronauts died , Clinton said NASA has faced greater setbacks and Americans have remained undaunted in their pursuit of frontiers in space .
`` This is nothing compared to the tragedy when those astronauts burned to death when their spaceship was still on the ground , '' Clinton said .
NASA `` did n't quit , and America did n't quit ... and I do n't think we should quit now . ''
The president was referring to the 1967 launchpad deaths of astronauts Gus Grissom , Ed White and Roger Shaffee .
Clinton did not mention the January 1986 Challenger explosion in which seven crew members were killed .
The president also defended NASA administrator Dan Goldin , whose `` faster , better , cheaper '' approach to space travel has been blamed for recent failures by some critics .
Goldin `` has adopted a lot of economy measures and gone for smaller , more discreet missions ... that I think make a lot of sense , '' Clinton said .
While NASA conceded this week the Mars Polar Lander that entered Mars ' atmosphere Friday is likely gone forever , Goldin has become the agency 's toughest critic .
`` Clearly something is wrong , and we have to understand it .
It is conceivable that we will completely change our approach '' Goldin said earlier this week .
`` Everything is on the table . ''
NASA plans to appoint a panel to look into what went wrong , and members of Congress announced this week they will hold hearings on the matter in February .
The loss of the $ 165 million Mars Polar Lander and its $ 29.2 million probes proved especially distressing to NASA officials after a navigation error caused the $ 125 million Mars Climate Orbiter to go off course and disappear in September .
NASA was supposed to receive signals last week when the Polar Lander touched down on the surface , generating electrical power and preparing to photograph its surroundings .
When the signals never came , it raised the question of whether the Polar Lander and the attached Deep Space 2 probes ever separated from the rocket stage that delivered them from Earth .
While officials hope to pinpoint why the spacecrafts disappeared , they acknowledged little information is available .
`` To be honest , there is a possibility we may never know what happened to the lander , '' said Carl Pilcher , NASA 's director of solar system exploration .
In the meantime , officials are searching for ways to prevent future spacecraft causalities .
Because the Mars Polar Lander failed to signal back to Earth , officials suggest future probes include larger radio transmitters and greater supplies of electrical power .
NASA may begin to scale back the scope of future missions and search for ways simply to ensure a mission may succeed , Pilcher said .
Already , NASA has considered postponing missions to Mars scheduled for 2001 , 2003 and 2005 .
The 2001 operation involves a spacecraft similar in design to the Mars Polar Lander , so `` obviously , we are not going to go ahead and just launch this spacecraft , '' Pilcher said .
Clinton and others say setbacks are to be expected , although they want to know how such errors can be avoided .
`` We 're trying to take a space ship the size of a boulder and throw it ... into a very uncongenial atmosphere and hit a target -LRB- 248 million miles away -RRB- .
And it is n't easy , '' Clinton said .
`` We all use the slogan : ` Well this is n't rocket science . '
Well , this is rocket science . ''
Some members of Congress downplayed the financial impact of the loss .
Rep. Dana Rohrabacher , R - Calif. , who chairs the House Space and Aeronautics subcommittee , said he would rather see NASA lose a `` $ 200 million spacecraft than a billion dollar one . ''
`` I think the failure of this project underscored the validity of a cheaper , faster , better model , '' he said .
Goldin implemented the `` cheaper , faster , better '' model after the disappearance of the $ 1 billion Mars Observer in 1993 , which Goldin said put too much pressure on NASA not to lose the spacecraft .
NASA 's Pilcher said NASA will not revert to the days of high-stakes exploration but may pursue a more cautious course .
`` We may need to let the pendulum swing back the other way and examine if we are on the right course . ''
In light of recent setbacks , support has waned for an eventual manned mission to Mars .
`` This failure should give pause to the people who want to maneuver us to a manned mission to Mars , which would cost us hundreds of billions of dollars ... and that is just unreasonable , '' Rohrabacher said .
XXXX END OF STORY
