Even as it leads the partnership assembling a new Earth -orbiting space station , NASA is looking to more distant vistas .
Possible destinations include the moon , visited by Apollo astronauts between 1969 and 1972 ; an asteroid ; or a solar orbit nearly a million miles away that would serve as the site for a powerful new space telescope .
But especially , Mars is a target .
`` Mars continues to be the grand goal , '' said Bret Drake , who leads mission planning activities at NASA 's Johnson Space Center .
These exotic missions are more than a decade away from launching .
And unlike the Apollo flights that spanned less than two weeks , these would require explorers to leave the Earth for months to years , raising technical hurdles and raising the cost into the billions .
White House space policy directives confine human activity to the new space station and the shuttle .
But they allow NASA to engage in research to develop advanced human life support equipment , deep space propulsion systems and cost cutting technologies .
On Saturday NASA will open the gates of Johnson Space Center between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m .
CDT , offering the public its free annual behind-the-scenes look at what its experts are doing to open those final frontiers .
The activities focused on getting humans far from the Earth will be interspersed among more than 100 displays that feature current pursuits , like the space station , the shuttle and mission control .
Among the research projects : Under development in Building 29 is the BIO - Plex , a cave-like collection of large interconnecting cylinders with the internal feel of a future deep space base .
BIO - Plex will serve as the laboratory for the development of life support systems that could sustain explorers on long voyages or settlers on the moon or Mars by recycling their breathing air , drinking water and food .
Without intensive recycling , NASA would be faced with supplying each of its deep space explorers with nearly 50,000 pounds of fresh supplies annually at a transportation cost of at least $ 10,000 per pound .
`` We 'd never be permitted to mount such a mission , '' said Don Henninger , NASA 's chief advanced life support researcher at Johnson .
In late 2003 , four volunteers will march into the BIO - Plex for a 240-day stay , relying on a combination of plants , compact machinery and chemicals to recycle the air they breath as well as their urine and the water they use to shower and wash their clothing .
The experimenters will be trained to grow some of their own food , including salad vegetables , sweet potatoes and wheat that can be processed into bread .
By 2008 , the facility will be home to volunteers for 540-day recycling trials , tests that begin to approach the current estimate of a single Mars mission .
The BIO - Plex will likely be used to study the psychological stresses of the isolation and confinement posed by the long flights as well as health care strategies .
NASA 's Neutral Buoyancy Lab , the monster swimming pool in which astronauts train for spacewalks to assemble the new space station , also houses the small Advanced Space Propulsion Laboratory .
The facilities are located north of the main Johnson campus and adjacent to Ellington Field .
Within the propulsion lab , astronaut and physicist Franklin Chang Diaz is directing the development of an electric propulsion system that could cut in half the 10-month travel time to Mars needed by conventional chemical rockets .
More rapid travel would cut the health risks to astronauts from cosmic radiation , a threat that experts have yet to quantify .
The propulsion researchers hope to deploy a test prototype of their variable specific impulse magneto-plasma rocket from the space shuttle in 2004 .
The design uses electrical current to create radio waves that heat hydrogen fuel , much the way a microwave oven warms food .
Since convention materials cannot withstand the high temperatures of a plasma engine , the combustion and the exhaust are constrained within a magnetic field created by cooled superconducting magnets .
In their small laboratory , the research team must rely on electricity from the local power company to warm small samples of fuel to 50,000 degrees .
An actual interplanetary spacecraft would need a nuclear reactor to heat its fuel to a million degrees .
Within a few weeks , researchers at Johnson will finish their work on an experimental propellant production device that until recently was to be launched to Mars aboard an unmanned probe in 2001 .
The launching was postponed indefinitely in the wake of NASA 's loss of the Mars Polar Lander last December .
Called MIPS , short for `` Mars In - Situ - Propellant Production Precursor , '' the device is about the size of a small microwave oven and developed to demonstrate that small amounts of oxygen can be extracted from the plentiful carbon dioxide in the Martian atmosphere .
Essential to humans for breathing , oxygen is also a rocket propellant .
Researcher David Kaplan estimates a full-scale production device on the Martian surface could produce about 90 pounds of oxygen a day .
Over the long haul , that production rate would be enough to launch a human crew on the return leg of a Mars expedition .
By producing oxygen on Mars , NASA could cut the mass of the cargo it must launch from Earth by 30 percent , a huge cost savings , said Kaplan .
Relying on a zeolite catalyst that draws oxygen from the Martian atmosphere during the daily temperature swings on the planet , the device has few moving parts and requires little electrical power , lowering the odds of a mechanical failure .
A life-sized mock-up of MIP will be on display in Building 15 of the main Johnson campus .
The actual flight experiment will be placed in storage soon where it will await reassignment to a future Mars launch .
Just four years ago , a team of scientists from the Johnson made headlines when it claimed the discovery of fossilized evidence of primitive bacteria within the crevices of a meteorite of Martian origin .
Experts continue to debate the claim .
But Johnson 's expertise in the preservation of rare meteorites and the lunar rocks gathered by the Apollo astronauts have made it the storage facility for the materials that will be collected by robotic rovers launched to Mars to gather soil and rock samples .
Once returned to Earth , the materials will be examined for signs of biological activity .
To date , 15 meteorites recovered from the Earth have been traced to Mars .
A fist sized sample of the first of those identified to be Martian , EETA 79001 , a 1-billion-year -old meteorite recovered from Antarctica will be on display in building 31 of the main Johnson campus .
The rock has not yielded evidence of past Martian life .
`` This is as close as the general public will ever get to the planet Mars , '' said Carlton Allen , who serves as Johnson 's curator of astrobiological materials .
Also on display in the same facility will be NASA 's Genesis probe .
The small spacecraft is slated for launching in February .
The unmanned probe was designed to gather samples of material from the solar wind and return with it to Earth in late 2003 .
The materials will be stored at Johnson .
XXXXXXXEND OF STORY $$$
