SEOUL , South Korea
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
South Korea demanded an apology from North Korea on Saturday as its navy continued an air and sea search for the remains of a vessel it sank two days ago .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">South Korean navy ships chased and then sank a low-slung speedboat believed to be from North Korea in a gunbattle off the country 's south coast Friday .</ENAMEX>
South Korean officials said the boat was on a mission to land or pick up North Korean spies in the South .
The latest incident came despite President Kim Dae -jung 's `` sunshine policy , '' under which Seoul is pushing economic exchanges to bring the two Koreas closer to peace on the divided peninsula .
`` We are shocked and enraged by the North 's continued provocative infiltrations , '' the Defense Ministry said in a statement .
`` We demand the North offer a responsible and convincing explanation . ''
The U.N. Command , which oversees the Korean Armistice that ended the 1950-53 Korean War , will demand a meeting with North Korean officials at the truce village of Panmunjom to protest the incident , the ministry said .
But President Kim 's office said the gunbattle will not derail its policy towards the North .
Meanwhile , navy ships and planes searched the sea off the southern coast of South Korea for a second day looking for bodies of crewmen and wreckage of the sunken boat .
Farther off in international waters , South Korean warships and planes search for a larger ship believed to have launched the speedboat .
No discoveries were reported in either operation .
On Friday , the body of one crewman was recovered shortly after the sinking of the boat .
On Saturday , the daily Chosun Ilbo , quoting military sources , reported investigators found traces of poison in the man 's body , indicating the crewmen may have killed themselves shortly before their vessel was sunk .
The ministry was unable to confirm the report .
The speedboat , carrying an estimated four people , was first spotted shortly before midnight Thursday as it approached Yosu , a small port on the southern tip of the Korean Peninsula .
The boat was pursued for hours by South Korean warships and air force planes until it was hemmed in and sunk in a gunbattle .
In June , a 70-ton North Korean submarine was found in South Korean waters with its propeller and periscope tangled in a fishing net .
South Koreans cut through the hatch and found nine bodies , all shot dead in an apparent suicide pact .
Seoul officials said it was on a spy mission .
