DONGHAE , South Korea
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
South Korean commandos cut open the hatch of a captured North Korean submarine Friday and found nine bodies , all shot to death in an apparent suicide pact .
Four of the North Koreans had been shot in the head , while the other five had been shot in other parts of the body , said Lt. Col. Kim Jong -sook .
Two automatic rifles were found near bodies in the main compartment of the small sub .
The navy had delayed opening the hatch to the compartment overnight for fear it was booby-trapped .
To make sure the hatch was safe , workers drilled six holes in the submarine and inserted tiny , remote-controlled cameras to survey it .
Then they cut through the hatch with welding torches and found the bodies .
Four bodies were found in the rear of the submarine , the rest in other compartments , officials said .
The navy commandos climbed down the tower of the sub Thursday and reached an upper access deck , but temporarily halted their search when they encountered a second , sealed hatch leading to the main compartment .
President Kim Dae -jung said the North Koreans `` appear to have been on an infiltration mission , '' according to a presidential spokesman .
Lt. Col. Kim , a spokesman for the Joint Chiefs of Staff , said two South Korean -made plastic beverage containers were found on the access deck -- an indication the vessel was returning north after dropping or picking up spies .
He also said the equipment inside the submarine was all intact , meaning the vessel would provide `` valuable information about North Korean navy and the commando activities . ''
The sub sank Tuesday while being towed to Donghae naval base on the east coast .
Swift currents and high seas hampered the salvage operation for two days .
Kim said the commandos temporarily stopped their search of the sub 's main deck on the advice of a former North Korean navy commando , who warned it could be trapped .
The search Thursday began shortly after the submarine was raised .
Navy divers , racing an approaching storm , attached four car-size yellow air bags to lift the submarine 30 meters -LRB- 110 feet -RRB- to the surface where an awaiting tug boat then towed it to shore .
The small , 70-ton Yugo -class submarine normally carries a crew of about six , and is the sort used primarily to transport spies and conduct coastline surveillance .
The sub was found Monday in the general area where a larger North Korean sub ran aground in 1996 .
That incursion triggered a 53-day manhunt that left 24 North Korean infiltrators and 13 South Koreans dead and relations between the two Koreas at their worst in years .
In Seoul , President Kim reaffirmed that the latest incident wo n't affect his policy of engagement toward the communist North .
Opposition politicians and some newspaper editorials have criticized Kim for not taking a harder line with North Korea because of the sub episode .
The 1950-53 Korean War ended without a peace treaty and the two nations are technically still at war .
Their border on the divided peninsula is the world 's most heavily guarded , with 2 million troops on both sides .
