SEOUL , South Korea
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Eighteen Hyundai group executives left for North Korea Monday to discuss details of planned tours to the reclusive communist state by South Korean and foreign tourists .
The delegation , led by Kim Woon -kyu , vice president of Hyundai Construction and Engineering Co. , was scheduled to arrive in North Korea Tuesday by way of Beijing , Hyundai officials said .
`` We will discuss tour itineraries , safety matters and all related working-level issues with our northern counterpart , '' Kim said .
Hyundai 's founder and honorary chairman , Chung Ju -yung , visited his native North Korea for eight days in June with a gift of 500 cattle .
He returned with agreements on several joint venture projects in the North .
One of the agreements would allow Hyundai to send 1,000 South Korean and foreign tourists weekly to Diamond Mountain , a major tourist site on the North 's east coast .
Hyundai hopes to send the first group of tourists north on a cruise liner in September .
The fate of Hyundai 's tour project , however , has been shadowed by a recent series of alleged North Korean spy incursions .
In June , a North Korean submarine was found tangled in a fishing net off the east coast .
In mid- July , the body of a suspected North Korean spy was found washed up on an east coast beach .
South Korea demanded an apology from North Korea but Pyongyang either denied involvement or refused to take responsibility .
Despite the incidents , the South Korean government allowed Hyundai officials to visit the North but hinted that actual tours could be delayed until North Korea apologizes .
`` Our policy is separating politics and the business .
Hyundai officials can go to the North and freely discuss business issues , '' said a spokesman for the Unification Ministry , speaking on condition of anonymity .
`` But sending thousands of tourists to North Korea is not a pure business issue in terms of safety and other related matters .
To realize the project , political tension on the peninsula should be resolved in some way , '' he said .
North Korea and South Korea fought a bloody three-year war in the early 1950s that ended in an armistice , not a peace treaty .
South Koreans are required to obtain government approval to visit North Korea or contact North Koreans .
