DONGHAE , South Korea
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
With warships circling , South Korean navy frogmen began attaching air bags to a sunken North Korean submarine Wednesday , hoping to raise the captured craft and look inside for signs of life and clues to its mission .
The small submarine broke loose from a towline and sank in 33 meters -LRB- 110 feet -RRB- of water a mile off shore Tuesday while being towed to this major east coast naval base by a South Korean frigate .
Fearing the submarine 's capture might derail his fragile efforts to entice the North to open up its society , President Kim Dae -jung ordered his hawkish Defense Ministry to refrain from any retaliatory rhetoric , his aides said .
`` Our men are putting cables round the submarine .
We hope that we can bring it back to the surface by this evening , '' said navy Capt. Park In -yong .
`` Then we will use cranes to haul it onto the pier and take a close look . ''
Park declined comment on the possible fate of the submarine 's crew .
But he had earlier said that the North Koreans , if still inside the craft , were probably dead .
Other Defense Ministry officials speculated that the crew managed to escape before their vessel was seized Monday while entangled in a mackerel fishing net just a half mile south of the North Korean border .
North Korea said Tuesday one of its submarines was missing on a training mission after experiencing mechanical problems .
Authorities described the craft seized Monday as a `` midget submersible , '' which can carry up to six crewmen and is used primarily to infiltrate spies and conduct coastal surveillance .
When the submarine was first spotted by South Korean fishermen , three crewmen were struggling desperately to free it from the net .
Navy divers got no response when they pounded on the sub 's hull with a hammer .
They also used sonar scans but detected no signs of life inside .
The discovery of the sub on the coast 200 kilometers -LRB- 125 miles -RRB- northeast of Seoul renewed concerns that North Korea was trying to infiltrate spies despite the South 's efforts to help the famine-stricken North with humanitarian aid .
The submarine was found just miles away from where another , larger North Korean sub ran aground off the east coast two years ago .
The 1996 incursion triggered a 53-day manhunt that left 24 North Korean infiltrators and 13 South Koreans dead and relations between the two Koreas at their worst in years .
The South cut off aid and jacked up diplomatic pressure until the North apologized .
This time , presidential aides have said the incident will not derail their new policy of engagement towards the North .
The 1950-53 Korean War ended without a peace treaty and the two nations are technically still at war .
Their border on the divided peninsula is the world 's most heavily guarded , with 2 million troops on both sides .
