DONGHAE , South Korea
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
A sunken North Korean submarine was raised Thursday and towed to shore , where South Korean commandos stood by to storm it with guns and tear gas .
The sub 's crew was believed to be dead , but officials were taking no chances .
Racing against an approaching storm , navy divers succeeded in attaching four car-size air bags to the submarine as it lay 30 meters -LRB- 110 feet -RRB- underwater .
By pumping air into the yellow bags , they raised the submarine , which was taken in tow by a tug boat .
`` We will tie the submarine to a barge and then soldiers will first take a look inside and around the submarine , '' said Maj. Kim Jong -woo , a Defense Ministry spokesman .
`` We believe that the North Korean crewmen have already died .
But we have to prepare against other possibilities .
We have a special team ready for that , '' said navy Capt. Park In -yong .
The North Korean submarine , already listing badly , sank Tuesday while being towed to this major naval base on the east coast after becoming entangled in South Korean fishing nets .
Rapid currents and high seas delayed the salvage operation .
Having detected no signs of life , military officials thought the submarine 's crew was either dead or had escaped before the ship was captured Monday .
Used primarily to infiltrate spies and conduct surveillance , the small , 70-ton Yugo -class submarine normally carries a crew of about six .
In Seoul , President Kim Dae -jung reaffirmed that his policy of engagement toward the communist North would not be swayed by the discovery of the submarine .
`` As shown in the intrusion of our territorial waters by the North Korean sub , military tensions persist even now on the Korean Peninsula , '' Kim said in a speech marking the 45th anniversary Thursday of the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950 .
`` But the new government will continue to strive to safeguard peace and expand South - North exchanges and cooperation on the basis of a firm defense posture and a flexible policy toward the North , '' he said .
The sub 's intrusion was a serious test of the so-called `` sunshine policy '' of the Kim 's government , which was inaugurated in February with a pledge to open up the reclusive North through expanded civilian contacts and cooperation .
Opposition politicians and some newspaper editorials have criticized Kim for not taking a harder line with North Korea following the sub 's discovery .
The sub was found in the general area where another , larger North Korean sub ran aground two years ago .
The 1996 incursion triggered a 53-day manhunt that left 24 North Korean infiltrators and 13 South Koreans dead and relations between the two Koreas at their worst in years .
The 1950-53 Korean War ended without a peace treaty and the two nations are technically still at war .
Their border on the divided peninsula is the world 's most heavily guarded , with 2 million troops on both sides .
