DONGHAE , South Korea
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Navy commandos found nine bodies Friday in a captured North Korean submarine , all shot dead in an apparent suicide pact .
Seoul said the sub was on a spy mission and demanded that North Korea apologize .
`` North Korea must acknowledge that the incident was a serious act of provocation , punish those involved and take action to prevent the recurrence of similar incidents , '' South Korea 's Defense Ministry said in a statement .
The ministry rejected an earlier North Korean claim that the submarine `` had been missing on a routine training mission after experiencing mechanical problems . ''
The ministry said it was asking the American -led U.N. Command to lodge a formal protest with North Korea .
The Koreas were divided into the communist North and the capitalist South in 1945 .
They are still technically at war , because the 1950-53 Korean War ended in an armistice , not a peace treaty .
President Kim Dae -jung denounced the sub 's intrusion but said the incident would not sway his engagement policy toward the North 's communist government .
Kim 's `` sunshine policy '' calls for expanded exchanges and cooperation in an effort to improve relations with the reclusive North .
The 70-ton Yugo -class submarine was found in South Korean waters off the east coast on Monday with its propeller and periscope tangled in a fishing net .
The sub was brought to this naval base for examination .
The navy had delayed opening the hatch overnight for fear it was booby-trapped .
To make sure the hatch was safe , workers drilled six holes in the submarine and inserted tiny remote-controlled cameras to survey it .
Then they cut through the hatch with welding torches and found the bodies .
Four were in the rear of the submarine and the rest in other compartments , officials said .
Four of the North Koreans had been shot in the head , while the other five had been shot elsewhere in the body , said Lt. Col. Kim Jong -sook .
Two automatic rifles were found near the bodies .
Kim , a spokesman for the Joint Chiefs of Staff , said two South Korean -made plastic beverage containers were found in the sub -- an indication the vessel was returning north after dropping or picking up spies .
Other items seized include two light machine guns , a pistol , two hand-grenades , a set of U.S. -made diving gear and three sets of frogmen 's flippers , he said .
Kim also said all equipment inside the submarine was intact and would provide `` valuable information about North Korean navy and the commando activities . ''
A day after it was captured , the sub sank while being towed .
Bad weather hampered the salvage operation for two days , but the sub was finally raised Thursday .
The sub was found in the same area where a larger North Korean sub ran aground in 1996 .
That incursion triggered a 53-day manhunt that left 24 North Korean infiltrators and 13 South Koreans dead and relations between the two Koreas at their worst in years .
In that episode , 10 North Koreans reportedly were shot to death by one of their commanders , who then killed himself .
