DONGHAE , South Korea
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
South Korea towed a captured North Korean submarine into this major naval base Tuesday , unsure if its crew was still aboard but angered by `` a clear armed provocation . ''
Officials said North Korea was questioned about the intrusion at a meeting Tuesday between generals of the communist nation and the United Nations Command , their first in seven years .
U.N. officials declined comment following the meeting .
`` The fact that the North Korean submarine infiltrated across the military demarcation line is a clear armed provocation and a violation of the armistice agreement , '' said Maj. Gen. Lim Jong -chul , chief operations officer for South Korea 's Joint Chiefs of Staff .
`` Our side will take proper action later , '' Lim said Although Lim did n't elaborate , the sub 's incursion was sure to further cloud relations between North and South Korea just as the new government of President Kim Dae -jung was beginning to reach out to its reclusive northern rival .
The meeting between an American general representing the United Nations and a North Korean general at the border village of Panmunjom was designed only as a get-acquainted session after the long moratorium on such talks .
But a spokesman for the Joint Chiefs said the submarine 's intrusion into South Korean waters was taken up by the U.N. officer .
North Korea broke off armistice talks at Panmunjom in 1992 , angered that a South Korean general had been named to represent the United Nations .
The North sees South Korea as a U.S. puppet and refuses to talk to it .
The sub was captured Monday after it became entangled in a fishing net off the east coast .
It was first towed to the small port of Yang - Yang , just south of the North Korean border , but officials later decided to bring it to the better equipped naval base at Donghae , 60 kilometers -LRB- 40 -RRB- miles down the coast .
`` We need to take extra precautions -LRB- with the sub -RRB- because -LRB- the crew -RRB- might blow it up , '' a Defense Ministry official said on condition of anonymity .
He added , however , that it was unclear whether anyone was aboard the vessel .
At one point during the night of towing , South Korean sailors pounded on the surface of the sub with a hammer , but there was no response from within .
SBS - TV in Seoul reported without attribution that the sub 's antenna moved up and down a few times shortly after daybreak and theorized the crew was trying to contact its headquarters in the North .
The Defense Ministry said it could not confirm the report .
The submarine was seized not far from where another , larger North Korean sub ran aground in 1996 -- an incident that ended with 37 people dead and relations between the two Koreas at their worst in years .
Military officials said as many as six North Koreans might be aboard the vessel seized Monday .
It was described as a `` midget submersible '' used primarily to infiltrate spies and conduct coastal surveillance .
North Korean agents are said to be told to commit suicide to avoid capture .
In the 1996 submarine incursion , 11 North Koreans were reportedly shot to death by one of their commanders , who then killed himself .
The boat seized Monday was a 70-ton Yugo -class submarine , 3 meters -LRB- 10 feet wide -RRB- and 18 meters -LRB- 60 feet -RRB- long , officials said .
A recent Defense Ministry report says North Korea has 14 such subs , each manned by a crew of four to five .
North Korean media monitored in Seoul made no mention of the incident .
South Korean officials said the sub 's antenna and propeller got caught in the fishing net about 18 kilometers -LRB- 10 miles -RRB- east of the town of Sokcho , just south of the North Korean border and 200 kilometers -LRB- 125 miles -RRB- northeast of Seoul .
The net had been set with buoys to be retrieved later .
A passing fishing boat spotted the entangled craft and radioed maritime police and the military .
Kim In -yong , skipper of the fishing boat , told police he saw three people on the sub 's deck trying to untangle the net .
Sokcho is about five miles from where the North Korean submarine ran aground in 1996 , touching off a 53-day manhunt for its 26 occupants .
The search by 60,000 soldiers , reservists and police ended with 24 North Korean infiltrators and 13 South Koreans dead .
One North Korean was captured and another was believed to have escaped .
The 1950-53 Korean War ended without a peace treaty and the two nations are technically still at war .
Their border on the divided peninsula is the world 's most heavily guarded , with 2 million troops on both sides .
