DONGHAE , South Korea
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
The South Korean navy towed a captured North Korean submarine into this major naval base Tuesday , unsure if its crew was still aboard .
A top military official called the intrusion `` a clear armed provocation . ''
Sonar scans of the submarine 's hull showed no signs of life inside , indicating that the crew was either dead or had escaped before the boat was taken in tow , the national news agency reported .
But the navy was having trouble towing the submarine to a pier for a closer examination because it was mostly submerged and officials said it had struck bottom in a harbor shallow .
The submarine , moored well out in the harbor and surrounded by four warships , could barely be seen from the coast .
Reporters were allowed inside the naval base , but kept away from the shore .
The news agency Yonhap quoted Maj. Gen. Lim Jong -chun , operations officer for the Joint Chiefs of Staff , as saying the ship was listing about 60 degrees .
`` It probably means that the inside is filled with water and that the crew perhaps drowned or suffocated due to lack of oxygen , '' Lim was quoted as saying .
`` However , '' he told Yonhap , `` it cannot be excluded that the crew may have escaped before the navy was called to the scene '' Monday .
Officials said North Korea was questioned about the intrusion at a meeting Tuesday between generals of the communist nation and the United Nations Command , their first in seven years .
The U.N. Command declined to characterize the North Korean response , but said in a statement that `` both sides reaffirmed the importance of continuing dialogue to build confidence , prevent misunderstanding and reduce tension on the Korean Peninsula . ''
The U.N. Command said the meeting was a `` good first step in establishing a crisis management mechanism to help prevent or deal with any military incidents '' -- a need it said was underscored by the seizure of the North Korean sub .
`` The fact that the North Korean submarine infiltrated across our coastal sea areas is a clear armed provocation and a violation of the armistice agreement , '' said the Joint Chiefs ' Lim .
`` Our side will take proper action later , '' Lim said without elaboration .
Despite Lim 's tough talk , an aide to President Kim Dae -jung said the sub 's incursion would not sidetrack the new government 's efforts to reach out to its reclusive northern rival .
`` The submarine incident will not shake our sunshine policy , '' the aide told reporters , speaking on condition of anonymity .
`` The government will try even harder to embrace the North to prevent the repetition of similar incidents . ...
We will deal with the North with patience . ''
North Korea 's official news agency reported Tuesday that one of the country 's submarines `` seems to be wrecked in ocean currents and waves '' off the coast of Kosong , a northern port .
The Korean Central News Agency said the submarine reported to its base at 2 p.m. -LRB- 0500 GMT -RRB- Sunday `` that it had troubles in a nautical observation instrument , oil pressure system and submerging and surfacing machines .
`` Now the life or death of the crew is unknown , '' KCNA said .
The meeting between three U.N. generals and a trio of North Korean generals at the border village of Panmunjom was designed only as a get-acquainted session after the long moratorium on such talks .
But a spokesman for the Joint Chiefs said the submarine 's intrusion into South Korean waters was taken up by the U.N. officers , headed by U.S. Maj. Gen. Michael Hayden .
North Korea broke off armistice talks at Panmunjom in 1992 , angered that a South Korean general had been named to lead the U.N. team .
The North sees South Korea as a U.S. puppet and refuses to talk to it .
The sub was captured Monday after it became entangled in a fishing net off the east coast .
It was first towed to the small port of Yang - Yang , just south of the North Korean border , but officials later decided to bring it to the better equipped naval base at Donghae , 60 kilometers -LRB- 40 -RRB- miles down the coast .
`` We need to take extra precautions -LRB- with the sub -RRB- because -LRB- the crew -RRB- might blow it up , '' said a Defense Ministry official , speaking on condition of anonymity .
He added , however , that it was unclear whether anyone was aboard the vessel .
At one point during the night of towing , South Korean sailors pounded on the surface of the sub with a hammer , but there was no response from within .
The submarine was seized not far from where another , larger North Korean sub ran aground in 1996 -- an incident that ended with 37 people dead and relations between the two Koreas at their worst in years .
Military officials said as many as six North Koreans might be aboard the vessel seized Monday .
It was described as a `` midget submersible '' used primarily to infiltrate spies and conduct coastal surveillance .
North Korean agents are said to be told to commit suicide to avoid capture .
In the 1996 submarine incursion , 11 North Koreans were reportedly shot to death by one of their commanders , who then killed himself .
South Korean officials said the periscope and propeller of the submarine seized Monday got caught in the fishing net about 18 kilometers -LRB- 10 miles -RRB- east of the town of Sokcho , just south of the North Korean border and 200 kilometers -LRB- 125 miles -RRB- northeast of Seoul .
Sokcho is about five miles -LRB- 8 kilometers -RRB- from where the North Korean submarine ran aground in 1996 , touching off a 53-day manhunt for its 26 occupants .
The search by 60,000 soldiers , reservists and police ended with 24 North Korean infiltrators and 13 South Koreans dead .
One North Korean was captured and another was believed to have escaped .
The 1950-53 Korean War ended without a peace treaty and the two nations are technically still at war .
Their border on the divided peninsula is the world 's most heavily guarded , with 2 million troops on both sides .
