SEOUL , South Korea
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Military investigators found traces of poison in a body recovered from a suspected North Korean boat sunk by South Korea 's navy , officials said Saturday .
The finding indicated that some of the boat 's crewmen may have killed themselves before their vessel was sunk Friday in a gunbattle off South Korea 's southern coast , Defense Ministry officials said .
South Korean warships pounded the low-slung speedboat with naval guns and depth charges .
Before it went down in waters 110 meters -LRB- yards -RRB- deep , the boat fought back with a machine gun fire at the end of a nearly six-hour chase .
The body of a crewman armed with a hand grenade and knife was found shortly after the vessel sank .
`` We found evidence that the man bit an ampul of poison .
We also found injuries from gun shrapnel , '' said Lt. Col. Lee Woon -se , a ministry spokesman .
Lee added North Korean agents were trained to commit suicide before being caught by South Korean troops .
Navy ships and planes continued a sea and air search for more bodies and wreckage of the sunken boat .
In a separate operation , Japan 's Self - Defense Forces assisted South Korean warships and planes searching international waters for a larger ship believed to have launched the speedboat , Lee said .
He refused to give further details .
South Korean officials believe the boat was on a mission to land or pick up North Korean spies in the South .
But North Korea 's government accused Seoul of fabricating the incident to raise tension and carry out a U.S. plan to trigger a second war on the divided Korean peninsula .
The incident `` is a farce cooked up for that purpose , '' the North 's official Korean Central News Agency quoted an unidentified spokesman of the Committee for the Peaceful Reunification of the Fatherland as saying .
`` We seriously warn the South Korean puppets not to act rashly , '' said the committee , the North 's government agency in charge of relations with the South .
Earlier Saturday , Seoul 's Defense Ministry said : `` We are shocked and enraged by the North 's continued provocative infiltrations . ''
`` We demand the North offer a responsible and convincing explanation , '' it said .
The latest incident came despite President Kim Dae -jung 's `` sunshine policy , '' under which Seoul is pushing economic exchanges to bring the two Koreas closer to peace on the divided peninsula .
The U.N. Command , which oversees the Korean Armistice that ended the 1950-53 Korean War , will demand a meeting with North Korean officials at the truce village of Panmunjom to protest the incident , the ministry said .
But President Kim 's office said the gunbattle will not derail its policy towards the North .
The speedboat , carrying an estimated four people , was first spotted shortly before midnight Thursday as it approached Yosu , a small port on the southern tip of the Korean Peninsula .
The boat was pursued for hours by South Korean warships and air force planes until it was hemmed in and sunk in a gunbattle .
In June , a 70-ton North Korean submarine was found in South Korean waters with its propeller and periscope tangled in a fishing net .
South Koreans cut through the hatch and found nine bodies , all shot dead in an apparent suicide pact .
Seoul officials said it was on a spy mission .
