SEOUL , South Korea
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
South Korea has effectively ended a fruitless manhunt for two possible North Korean spies , a week after the body of a suspected communist infiltrator was found on an east coast beach , military officials said Sunday .
Small -scale searches by regional land and coast guard units will continue , but a massive search has ended and a dusk-to-dawn curfew in most of the immediate area was lifted Saturday , said officials at the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
South Korea believes any foreign agents who might have been in the coastal region have probably either died or already returned to North Korea , one military official said , speaking on condition of anonymity .
The official declined to elaborate .
The South Korean military has come under intense public criticism for carrying out the unsuccessful week-long manhunt and damaging the east coast 's vital tourism industry .
The search was initiated after a body clad in a black diving suit was washed ashore July 12 on an east coast beach .
Also found were a submachine gun , hand grenade and a torpedo-shaped underwater propulsion device .
The underwater transport is capable of carrying up to five scuba divers and is similar to devices used by North Korean spies in the past .
Analyzing the weapons and equipment seized , military officials thought that two companions of the dead communist infiltrator might have come ashore .
But the manhunt failed to find any North Korean agents .
Late last week , the Defense Ministry fired three military commandos , holding them responsible for the incursion .
North Korea denied involvement , accusing South Korean ultra-rightists of staging the incident as part of an anti- North Korea campaign .
A month ago , a small North Korean submarine was found entangled in a fishing net off the east coast of South Korea .
Nine bodies were discovered in the Yugo -class sub , all shot to death in what military investigators described as a murder-suicide committed by senior officers to avoid capture .
With no peace treaty signed at the end of the 1950-53 Korean War , the Koreas remain technically in a state of war .
Their border is the world 's most heavily guarded , with nearly 2 million troops deployed on both sides .
