DONGHAE , South Korea
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Navy commandos with welding torches opened the main hatch of a captured North Korean submarine Thursday , but delayed their search of its main deck after a warning that it could be booby-trapped .
Officials believed that the sub 's crewmen were dead , but were taking no chances in examining the craft .
`` We checked the sub 's upper access deck but found no signs of human life there , '' said Lt. Col. Kim Jong -sook , a spokesman for the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
Kim said work to open the second hatch leading to the sub 's main hull was temporarily halted on advice from a former North Korean navy commando who warned that it could be booby-trapped .
The search began shortly after the sunken submarine was raised from 30 meters -LRB- 110 feet -RRB- underwater and towed to shore .
Four car-size air bags were used to lift the submarine to the surface .
In the area that was searched , navy officials found two South Korean -made plastic beverage containers -- a strong indication that the vessel was returning after dropping or picking up spies .
`` What was found in the sub was contrary to a North Korean claim that the sub was missing while on a routine training mission after experiencing mechanical problems '' the state KBS - TV said .
A day after it was discovered foundering in South Korean waters with its propeller and periscope entangled in a fishing net , the North Korean sub sank while being towed to this major naval base on the east coast .
Bad weather delayed the salvage operation .
The sub was found in the general area where another , larger North Korean sub ran aground two years ago .
The 1996 incursion triggered a 53-day manhunt that left 24 North Korean infiltrators and 13 South Koreans dead .
One infiltrator was captured alive and another was missing and believed to have returned to the North .
The captured agent , Lee Kwang Su , was brought to assist in Thursday 's search .
He warned that North Korean agents on spy or commando missions are usually trained to blow up their craft and commit suicide before being captured .
Used primarily to infiltrate spies and conduct surveillance , the small , 70-ton Yugo -class submarine normally carries a crew of about six .
In Seoul , President Kim Dae -jung reaffirmed that his policy of engagement toward the communist North would not be swayed by the discovery of the submarine .
`` As shown in the intrusion of our territorial waters by the North Korean sub , military tensions persist even now on the Korean Peninsula , '' Kim said in a speech marking the 48th anniversary Thursday of the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950 .
`` But the new government will continue to strive to safeguard peace and expand South - North exchanges and cooperation on the basis of a firm defense posture and a flexible policy toward the North , '' he said .
The sub 's intrusion was a serious test of the so-called `` sunshine policy '' of Kim 's government , which was inaugurated in February with a pledge to open up the reclusive North through expanded civilian contacts and cooperation .
Opposition politicians and some newspaper editorials have criticized Kim for not taking a harder line with North Korea following the sub 's discovery .
The 1950-53 Korean War ended without a peace treaty and the two nations are technically still at war .
Their border on the divided peninsula is the world 's most heavily guarded , with 2 million troops on both sides .
