SEOUL , South Korea
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
South Korean navy ships using sonar scanners continued to search Sunday for a sunken North Korean spy boat off South Korea 's south coast , military officials said .
The 12-ton spy boat went down in waters 110 meters -LRB- yards -RRB- deep before dawn Friday in a gun battle with South Korean navy ships .
The body of a crewman armed with a hand grenade and knife was recovered after the vessel sank .
Officials said navy ships were searching for more bodies and wreckage of the sunken boat .
`` Recovery of the sunken ship is needed to determine the exact number of crewmen , its equipment and mission , '' said Maj. Gen. Lee Jang -hum who heads an investigation into the case .
Announcing his team 's findings , Lee said the communist boat , believed to be carrying up to eight crewmen , sailed out of North Korea 's western port of Nampo , home to a major naval intelligence unit .
The spy boat was first spotted shortly before midnight Thursday as it approached Yosu , a port on the southern tip of the Korean Peninsula .
The boat was pursued for hours by South Korean warships and air force planes before it was sunk in a gun battle .
Lee said his team has concluded that the communist craft was foiled in an attempt to land spies .
He described the sunken vessel as a `` semi-submersible craft , '' commonly used by North Koreans to drop off or pick up spies .
Launched from a `` mother ship '' which stays in international waters , such a craft can be operated with virtually all of its body under water without being detected by radar , Lee said .
`` It is believed to be a renovated model , about 12.8 meters -LRB- 39 feet -RRB- long , twice as big as the old type , '' he said .
A North Korean boat of the same type was seized in a gun battle off South Korea 's south coast in 1983 .
One agent was killed and two others captured .
On Saturday , Seoul 's Defense Ministry demanded an apology from North Korea for the infiltration .
North Korea rejected the South Korean accusations as a fabrication .
Several North Korean spy crafts have been caught infiltrating South Korean waters in recent years .
In June , a 70-ton North Korean submarine was found off South Korea 's east coast with its propeller and periscope tangled in a fishing net .
South Koreans cut through the hatch and found nine bodies , all shot dead in an apparent suicide pact .
Seoul officials said it was on a spy mission .
North Korea and South Korea are still technically still at war , because the 1950-53 Korean War ended in an armistice , not a peace treaty .
