SEOUL , South Korea
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
President Kim Dae -jung proposed Tuesday that South and North Korea jointly investigate the deaths of nine crewmen of a captured North Korean submarine .
The offer was to be extended to North Korea later Tuesday at a meeting between generals from the North and the American -led U.N. Command at the border village of Panmunjom .
After the submarine was towed to shore last week , nine bodies were found inside .
South Korean officials said all had been shot , apparently to avoid capture .
But North Korea said the sub had drifted into southern waters because of mechanical problems and questioned South Korea 's explanation of the cause of death of the crew .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">`` We need to deal aggressively with the North 's unreasonable arguments , '' the president was quoted as saying by his spokesman , Park Ji -won .
On Monday , South Korea said the submarine was on a spying mission , briefly landing three agents on the South 's eastern coast , which is dotted with airfields , naval bases and other key military facilities .</ENAMEX>
What those agents did on shore was not clear , but the Defense Ministry said they may have contacted North Korean spies already on land , before returning to the submarine .
The nine bodies were discovered when the sub 's hatches were opened Friday , four days after the 70-ton craft was found tangled in a fishing net off South Korea 's east coast .
An analysis of gunshot wounds indicated that five of the North Koreans were killed by the sub 's captain and the three agents , who then killed themselves , South Korean officials said .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">President Kim asked North Korea to admit the incursion and prevent a recurrence , but said the episode would not end civilian exchanges and increasing cooperation to open the North 's reclusive communist society .</ENAMEX>
The Korean peninsula was divided into the communist North and the capitalist South in 1945 .
The countries are still technically at war , since the 1950-53 Korean War ended in an armistice , not a peace treaty .
