TOKYO --
South Korean naval forces sank a North Korean torpedo boat Tuesday as a fierce gun battle erupted in the Yellow Sea , and South Korea put its entire armed forces on combat level of alert .
Another North Korean vessel was sinking and it appeared to be towed away by its comrade ships .
South Korea 's sinking of the ship abruptly intensified the confrontation in the disputed waters of the Yellow Sea , and it is not clear how North Korea will respond .
Even as the firing broke out , talks to resolve the nine-day crisis between North Korean officials and the U.N. Command began Tuesday morning in the demilitarized zone , Panmunjum .
Tuesday 's battle is the most serious setback in relations between the two sides since December 1998 , when South Korean forces sunk a spy submarine that had intruded deeply into South Korean waters .
It is sure to aggravate the already strained relations between North Korea and the rest of the world .
South Korea said it fired in reaction to shots fired by North Korean torpedo boats in the disputed waters , rich crab-fishing grounds where the two navies had been taunting each other for days .
An official with South Korea 's armed forces , who spoke on the condition he not be identified , said the South 's naval vessels were trying to prevent enemy vessels from heading to the south .
In the process , they fired on a North Korean torpedo ship and hit the boat 's generator cabin , which caught on fire .
The vessel then sank .
The exchange of fire lasted nearly 30 minutes , according to Korean news reports .
`` In response to firing by the North Korean navy , our naval vessels fired immediately , according to military regulations , '' said Col. Hwang Dong -kyu , spokesman for South Korea 's Joint Chiefs of Staff .
`` We have placed all naval forces in the area on combat alert status . ''
Combat alert is a state of emergency below a state of war .
Cha Young -kuk , a spokesman for the South Korean Defense Department , said : `` One North Korean rescue boat was half-sunk and one small North Korean patrol boat has sunk . ''
A high-speed South Korean patrol boat fired .76 mm rounds at the North Koreans , Hwang said , adding that South Korea was `` taking measures to contain the situation . ''
South Korea 's government-owned Yonhap News Agency quoted a local fisherman in a small village as saying that he had heard an explosion at about 9 : 25 a.m .
There were no immediate reports of deaths .
South Korea said seven sailors were slightly injured and that one of its boats was partially immobilized .
`` One high-speed patrol boat received some damage and one patrol boat has been partially immobilized due to damages in the generator room , but this has not posed serious damages in terms of mobility , '' Cha said .
North Korean patrol boats had intruded early Monday morning into the disputed waters south of the effective demarcation line separating the countries ' waters .
The North does not recognize the line , but it has never challenged it this openly in recent years .
The armistice ending the 1950-53 Korea War , signed by the U.N. Command and North Korea , never outlined the maritime border off the Korean peninsula 's central western coast .
The U.N. Command unilaterally demarcated the sea frontier in 1953 and created a buffer zone south of it to avoid armed clashes .
On Sunday , North Korean boats , armed with torpedoes , apparently surfaced near the disputed area , but no shots were fired .
The U.N. Command , led by U.S. military officers and supported by 37,000 American troops stationed in South Korea , then called upon North Korea to discuss the crisis .
North Korea agreed to talk to U.N. military officials as part of an effort to resolve the increasingly belligerent confrontation .
Over the past few days , South Korean patrol boats had been defending the line by ramming into at least three North Korean vessels , as rising tensions have forced South Korea 's Defense Ministry to order warships to the area in a show of force .
South Korea has asked the United States to put some of its forces on alert .
South Korea also put its army on alert , telling servicemen that they were not to fire unless they were fired upon first .
They were explicitly warned by Navy chief Adm. Lee Soo Yong not to `` concede even an inch of our territories . ''
The last bitter military confrontation between the two Koreas took place in December 1998 , when a North Korean submarine intruded deep into South Korean waters and was then sunk by South Korean forces in a firefight just off South Korea 's southern coast .
A team of four North Koreans fled the submarine , spawning a long man-hunt for the spies .
All but one of them were shot during the search by South Korean forces .
A spokesman for the U.S. command forces in South Korea said that it was closely watching the situation , but that it had not changed the status of its forces by putting them on any special alert .
