TOKYO --
South Korean military forces seized a suspected North Korean submarine Monday night after it became entangled in fishing nets in South Korean waters , immediately raising tensions between the countries .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">President Kim Dae -jung of South Korea ordered his armed forces to step up their defensive posture and to be on the alert for incursions along the coast .
The capture of the submarine is quite likely to be a setback for a central policy effort of Kim , a `` sunshine '' policy intended to show conciliation to the North to ease tensions between the two Koreas .</ENAMEX>
The captain of a South Korean fishing boat , Kim In -yong , told Korean television that he had spotted the dark green submarine after its periscope had become entangled in drift nets 11 miles east of the town of Sokcho .
He said he saw several crew members in North Korean uniforms trying frantically to cut the nets .
South Korean military forces rushed to the scene and , under intensive security , towed the submarine to port overnight .
Defense Ministry officials said they could not confirm the nationality of the submarine until they had examined it closely , and they are proceeding carefully , for fear that the crew may still be inside and planning to blow it up .
`` There are no signs that identify it by country , '' a spokesman for the ministry , Park In -young , said .
`` But it could be a North Korean submarine , as it is not a South Korean or U.S. submarine . ''
Officials said the submarine was believed to be a Yugo -class boat , 70 tons and 60 feet long .
North Korea is believed to have 14 Yugo -class submarines , used for spying and dropping off special forces in enemy territory .
While the incident created an anxious stir in South Korea , it seems for now quite different from an incursion by a North Korean submarine in September 1996 .
That submarine ran aground on the South Korean coast , apparently while trying to drop off armed commandos , and the crew and commandos all slipped ashore .
In contrast , the submarine found on Monday was 11 miles off the coast , and the fishing captain said it had been drifting .
He did not know whether it had lost power .
From an account of the Defense Ministry , the submarine appeared to have been perhaps 30 miles south of the line that divides North and South Korean waters .
North Korea has not commented so far , but after the incursion in 1996 it said that the submarine had drifted off course and asked for its return .
Eventually it apologized .
A Yugo -class submarine would usually have three to seven people aboard , and South Korean officials said they believed that the crew was still on board .
South Korean officers tried to communicate with the crew but did not get any response , and the South Koreans decided not to open the hatch until they had towed the submarine to a military base where they could control the area .
North Korean military officers , especially those entrusted with submarines , have in the past been extremely dedicated and ready to commit suicide rather than accept capture .
But if some of them agree to cooperate with the South Koreans , a result could be an intelligence bonanza for the South and for the American analysts who will also ask to take part in the interrogations .
The United States declined immediate comment but said South Korean officials were briefing them on the incident .
`` We do n't have all the facts , '' said a spokesman for the State Department , James Rubin .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">The finding of the submarine will be a delicate challenge for President Kim .
A longtime dissident who took office in February and who is still not entirely trusted by the armed forces , he needs to show that he is tough in the presence of any North Korean challenge .</ENAMEX>
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">But too much toughness might endanger his policy of engaging North Korea economically and building mutual trust .</ENAMEX>
One fruit of the policy is a landmark meeting Tuesday between American and North Korean generals in the border town of Panmunjon .
The meeting was set up as a channel of communication in the event of a crisis , and it is expected to deal with the capture of the submarine .
