TOKYO --
A North Korean vessel that intruded deep into South Korea 's waters was pursued and sunk Friday morning after a fire fight with South Korean forces , South Korean officials said .
The vessel , whose incursion is sure to aggravate the already strained relations between North Korea and the rest of the world , was first detected late Thursday a mile from the city of Yosu on South Korea 's southern coast , the Defense Ministry said .
After a pursuit in which the North and South Korean boats exchanged fire , the South Korean navy sank the intruder at dawn Friday about 60 miles off shore in 300 feet of water .
South Korea referred to the North Korean boat as a `` half-submarine , '' describing it as a high-speed boat that is mostly submerged and thus difficult to detect .
`` There were a series of warnings and warning shots by the joint forces against the escaping half-submarine , but the sub continued to flee and fired back , '' said Hwang Dong Kyu , a Defense Ministry spokesman .
`` As a result , a Korean naval vessel fired on and sank the submarine . ''
The half-submarine carried about four people , and the body of one North Korean commando was recovered in the water , the Defense Ministry said .
Relations between North Korea and the West have been deteriorating , with North Korean officials regularly warning of the possibility of another Korean war .
The four-year -old `` Agreed Framework '' intended to ease tensions on the Korean peninsula has seemed in recent months to be headed for a possible breakdown .
In addition , North Korea is believed to be close to conducting another rocket test , after one over Japan in September sent tensions rising in East Asia .
The one leader who has been arguing for conciliatory policies to engage the North has been President Kim Dae Jung of South Korea , but Kim 's calls have been constantly undermined by North Korea .
Already criticized for being soft on the North , Kim may find his room to maneuver even more limited after Thursday 's incursion .
North Korea had no immediate comment .
But the North normally denies that it ever sends commandos into the South , and when it has been caught , it has said that its submarines have lost power and drifted south , even when the prevailing current is moving north .
Military officers and diplomats in Seoul say that North Korea regularly sends submarines sneaking into South Korean waters , partly to infiltrate commandos for reconnaissance missions to gather intelligence .
Several times it has been caught , most spectacularly in September 1996 , when a taxi driver along the South Korean coast spotted a 110-foot North Korean submarine that had been beached on the rocks .
An intensive search then by 40,000 South Korean troops turned up 25 North Korean intruders , some of them killed by other North Koreans so as not to slow the group down .
One was never found and is presumed to have died in the woods or possibly to have slipped across the border back to the North .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">As recently as June , another North Korean submarine was captured in South Korean waters , and shortly afterward the body of a North Korean commando -- apparently from a different submarine -- was found on a South Korean beach .
North Korea has many spies in South Korea , and it is relatively easy to give a North Korean spy a fake or stolen Japanese passport and have him fly into South Korea in the comfort of business class .</ENAMEX>
So one of the puzzles has been why North Korea goes to the risk of infiltrating with submarines and other vessels .
Intelligence analysts say that one reason may be to test South Korean defenses , for in a war North Korean doctrine calls for infiltrating commandos deep into South Korea to disrupt communications and blow up buildings to sow chaos and fear .
In addition , some of the submarines are said to be dropping off weapons to be hidden in case they are needed in the future .
