TOKYO --
An early morning firefight Tuesday in disputed waters in the Yellow Sea receded into a verbal clash , as North Korea demanded an apology and lashed out at South Korea for sinking one of its warships .
Each side contended that the other fired first .
But the result is not disputed .
South Korean ships fired on and hit a North Korean torpedo boat , causing it to catch fire and sink .
All 17 North Koreans aboard were killed , said the South Korean state-owned Yonhap News Agency .
Five North Korean patrol boats were also damaged in the fight , possibly the fiercest naval clash since the Korean War ended in 1953 .
One South Korean boat suffered mild damage , and no South Koreans were seriously hurt .
The incident is sure to put further strains on North Korea 's relations with the South and with the rest of the world .
It also occurs at an awkward moment as North Korea considers a United States plan , devised by former Defense Secretary William Perry , that could lead to a significant expansion of relations between North Korea and the West , in exchange for concessions including an agreement that the North end its long-range missile program .
The clash may also be a setback for South Korean President Kim Dae Jung , who has been pushing his `` sunshine policy '' of engagement with the North .
The South Korean government has advocated stronger business ties and was instrumental in helping the Hyundai Corp. set up special tours to the scenic Mount Kumgang area in North Korea .
Tours leave virtually every day , and there were scores of tourists in North Korea , along with thousands of South Korean business executives , when the gun battle occurred Tuesday .
As South Korean government officials tried to ensure the safety of its citizens currently in the North , the two sides exchanged warnings and threats , each blaming the other for the gunfire .
`` We interpret North Korea 's armed provocation as a very significant act , '' said Hwang Won Tak , Kim 's top security advisor .
Military experts said that while there were still risks of more skirmishes , Tuesday 's confrontation was not likely to intensify .
`` The chances of today 's incident escalating into a full-scale battle is low , '' an analyst at the Korea Institute for Defense Analyses , Suh Choo Suk , said .
`` The North merely wanted to turn the area into disputed territory . ''
Others warned that there were still risks of miscalculation and the situation was volatile .
`` This is more serious than before , '' said a South Korean government official who works on North Korean matters and refused to be identified by name .
`` It 's a buffer zone , they are fighting with each other and there are battle ships .
This is how wars begin . ''
The confrontation began Monday of last week , when North Korean naval vessels escorted fishing boats south of the `` northern limit line , '' the customary line of demarcation between the two Koreas in the Yellow Sea .
The North does not recognize the line and periodically sends ships south of it , but they normally retreat when ordered back by South Korean patrol boats .
This time , though , the North Korean vessels held their ground , and on Friday the South began to ram the North Korean boats to drive them north again .
Tuesday was the first time there was gunfire , however .
South Korean officials say that one of its high-speed patrol boats fired 76 millimeter rounds at the North Koreans .
There were about 10 North Korean vessels in the confrontation , and by night time , they had all returned to their side of the line , according to the Yonhap News Agency .
It said that two North Korean boats remained only about a mile north of the line , however .
North Korea 's official news agency said there were a dozen South Korean warships in Tuesday 's clash and that they fired some 150 shells and more than 7,000 machine-gun bullets .
Talks were held Tuesday at the border village of Panmunjom between North Korea and the U.N. Command , beginning just moments after news of the sinking North Korean ship reached negotiators .
The United Nations requested that both sides withdraw their ships from the disputed waters , but no agreement was reached and discussions ended after 90 minutes without any plans to resume .
`` The South Koreans must immediately apologize for the serious consequences of their armed provocations , '' said a statement issued by the North Korea news agency .
`` They must not run amok , clearly mindful that if military provocations are continued , they will meet a thousand-fold retaliatory blow . ''
The clash took place in a good crab fishing area , at the height of the crab season , which is why North Korean fishing boats were in the area .
North Korea has been plagued by widespread famine , and it particularly values crabs because it can export them for hard currency .
South Korea is sending batches of fertilizer to North Korea , as a condition for two-way talks that are expected to take place in Beijing on June 21 .
Tuesday , however , the South Korean government said that one ship with about 14,000 tons of fertilizer , or 14 percent of the agreed-upon amount , turned back toward the South until its safety could be assured .
Hwang Dong -kyu , a spokesman for the South Korean Joint Chief of Staff , said that the United States was helping South Korea formulate measures to respond to North Korea .
