SEOUL , South Korea --
The gun smoke over the high seas may be gone , but there is growing apprehension here that as relations with the North become more varied , they will also become more vexing .
As they watched a push-and-shove naval match in the Yellow Sea erupt into a firefight last week , many South Koreans renewed their belief that even as relations thaw across the Korean peninsula , North Korea remains an irascible , secretive , terrorist neighbor .
While North Korea blames the South for an exchange of fire on Tuesday in which South Korean naval vessels sank a Northern torpedo boat , South Koreans are certain that the incident was initiated by the North and that the North was the first to open fire .
The confrontation left at least 20 North Koreans dead .
Two days later , President Kim Dae -jung reaffirmed his `` sunshine policy '' of expanded contacts with North Korea .
He also ordered resumption of an aid shipment of 14,000 tons of fertilizer to the North .
Thus , relations with the North seem increasingly fraught with contradiction , as engagement and confrontation play out simultaneously .
Lee Sei -ki , a former minister of unification , expressed the mood when he spoke to the National Assembly this week on the rising tourism to North Korea in the seas to the east of South Korea .
`` In the West Sea , there was an exchange of fire , while in the East Sea , there was a luxury cruiser going back and forth to the North , '' he declared .
`` This is the most bizarre situation since the division of this country .
And the public is confused . ''
The high seas shootout erupted after a nine-day standoff in disputed waters in the Yellow Sea , where North Korean fishing vessels were catching crab just south of the `` northern limit line , '' the customary line of demarcation separating the seas of the two Koreas .
The North does not recognize the line and has often sent ships south of it , but they normally retreat when shouted back by South Korean patrol boats .
This time , however , the North Korean vessels refused to back off .
A week ago , South Korean vessels began to ram the North Korean boats .
The North responded by opening fire , according to the South 's account .
Kim 's policy of engagement is an attempt to end the hard-line approach that traditionally shaped South Korean attitudes to the North , and it has become an important cornerstone of his administration .
What was earlier a bold proposal , has now become a tricky one .
Opposition lawmakers have criticized Kim , saying that it was inappropriate to reward the North with fertilizer shortly after it had triggered a naval battle .
`` We do n't want war .
We have to do something humanitarian to help North Korea feed its children , so there is no opposition to that , '' said Lee Shin -bom , an opposition lawmaker .
`` But the sunshine policy is one of the tools we may use .
It cannot be an unchangeable principle . ''
In any case , many South Koreans appeared relieved at the display of force by the American military , which is sending ships , destroyers and an aircraft carrier to the region .
Some said that as officials in the South were playing down the episode , Americans were doing the opposite and that this could create misunderstandings in the future .
`` The South Korean government is betting on the sunshine policy as a kind of adventure , and experiment , '' said Paik Jin -hyun , professor of international relations at Seoul National University .
`` There is likely to be a further perception gap between South Korea and the U.S. '' This is a crucial moment for North Korea .
Its relations with the South and the rest of the world seemed to offer the promise of becoming smoother , despite its firing of a missile over Japan last year and suspicions that it is building nuclear weapons .
Moreover , it is considering a U.S. plan , drawn up by former Defense Secretary William Perry , that could lead to a dramatic warming in relations between North Korea and the West .
But some experts say that it is also a time of intense conflict and confusion within the North Korean leadership , as leaders try to cope with widespread famine and disgruntlement in the ranks .
Thus , South Korea may become the target of more violence as North Korean leaders try to redirect anger against themselves toward a common enemy in the South .
`` For North Koreans , psychologically they are depressed , '' said Kim Joung -won , a professor of international politics at Sejong University .
`` They can say that South Korea attacked North Korea and therefore we must solidify and unite against the enemy . ''
Some see the incident in the Yellow Sea as a sign of maturity , in that South Korea can embrace both tourism and torpedoes from the North .
Others see it as a sign that the North is just pushing the South around and taking its money to boot .
As part of a tourism project run by Hyundai Corp. , South Korea 's largest conglomerate , South Koreans get to tour Mount Kumgang in the North , in exchange for pouring $ 125 million in cash so far this year into an offshore bank account owned by the North .
`` The government is almost obsessed with the sunshine policy , '' said Park Shin -il , a spokesman for the opposition party , the Grand National Party .
`` And therein lies a question : Why are we doing it ?
For whom ?
North Korea ?
South Korea ?
Kim Dae -jung ? ''
