SEOUL , July 23 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- South Korea plans to allow the Hyundai Group to go ahead with its Mountain Kumgang tourism project in the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea -LRB- DPRK -RRB- , despite escalated tension in inter- Korean relations .
`` There is no reason to prevent Hyundai officials from visiting the North to discuss details of the project , '' Hwang Ha -soo , director for intra- Korean exchanges and cooperation of the Unification Ministry , said Thursday .
Hyundai signed a landmark agreement with the DPRK to develop the Mountain Kumgang tourism project when its head , Chung Ju -yung visited the the DPRK last June .
On returning from the DPRK , Chung announced that Hyundai would operate cruise boats between the ports of the South and the North on the east coast of the East Sea , from September .
However , the ambitious project hit a snag when a DPRK submarine was caught by the South Korean military on June 22 after it was spotted entangled in a fishing net in South Korean waters .
Twenty days later , the body of an armed agent was found washed ashore on South Korea 's eastern coast .
Last week , the South Korean government decided to hold back the Mountain Kumgang project and other inter- Korean economic cooperation programs until the DPRK apologized for the two incidents and promised not to repeat them .
Pyongyang refused to meet Seoul 's demands , accusing it of fabricating the armed agent incident .
The two incidents escalated tension in the Korean peninsula , whose two sides have been technically at war since the Korean War of 1950-53 .
Seoul 's plan to give the go-ahead to Hyundai is seen as the continuation of President Kim Dae -jung 's `` Sunshine Policy , '' although Kim recently vowed to take stern and resolute actions against military provocations from the DPRK .
Hyundai said it is planning to send a group of technicians to the DPRK next Tuesday to discuss details of the project with the DPRK , including the construction of a wharf for cruise boats carrying South Korean tourists to the DPRK .
`` The ministry of Unification made the decision in favor of the Hyundai officials ' visit based on a judgment that preparations for the project can be pursued before the North apologizes , '' he said .
Hwang disclosed that Hyundai received a letter guaranteeing South Korean tourists ' safety from the DPRK Ministry of Public Security early this month .
The two sides will set up a joint arbitration committee consisting of officials from Hyundai and the DPRK 's Asia - Pacific Peace Committee , which signed the contract of the Mt .
Kumgang project .
The commission will settle possible disputes involving South Korean tourists in the DPRK , the director said .
