Sarn Helen and the Lledr Valley

Start: Dolwyddelan

Distance: 6 miles (9.5km)

Approximate time: 3 hours

Parking: Dolwyddelan, car park and picnic area by station

Refreshments: Pubs and cafes at Dolwyddelan

Ordnance Survey maps: Landranger 225 (Snowdon), Explorer 0L18 (Harlech, Porthmadog & Bala)

Here is a walk in the heart of Snowdonia that has associations with the native Welsh princes. It starts by heading up a lovely enclosed valley, following the line of Sarn Helen, a Roman road, then continues much more steeply through the thick conifers of Gwydyr Forest high above the Lledr Valley. The gradual descent into the valley gives open and extensive views, dominated by the rugged grandeur of Moel Siabod in the background and the imposing ruins of Dolwyddelan Castle in the foreground -- the latter is in sight for much of the rest of the way and the final leg of the walk passes below its walls.

The village of Dolwyddelan is situated below the spectaculat rugged slopes of Moel Siabod in the Lledr Valley, about 3/4 mile (1.25km) to the east of the castle. It has a small, largely unrestored 16th-century church.

Begin by turning left out of the car park and picnic area, turn left again to cross the railway bridge and turn immediately right. Follow the road as it bears left and heads uphill. After passing the last of the houses the road narrows to a rough, tarmac track, following the line of the Roman road Sarn Helen, which linked north and south Wales, and proceeding steadily upwards through Cwm Penamner. Go through a metal gate and continue -- this is a most attractive route through the steep-sided valley with forest on the left, crags on the right and the small river gushing over rocks and falls. Beyond another gate the lane levels out amidst recently felled plantations, which work has opened out striking views up the imposing valley. Remain on the lane and pass by an access road to a remote house.

You'll reach a renovated cottage on your left. On the right here, a finger-post set back from the lane indicates a narrow path that rises through the clear-felled lower slopes roughly parallel to a wall on your right. Waymarks point the way to a forestry road; cross straight over to join a path beneath conifers. Wind with this steep, slate path (a stream in wet weather) to the top of the plantation where the slope levels out.

Climb the rickety stile and walk ahead a few paces to cross the ridge-top and reveal a grand panorama of the distant Snowdon horseshoe. Look half-right to find and join a discernible path that drops easily along the right-hand fringe of the great hollow below. In places this becomes indistinct, but there are occasional waymark posts - you're essentially heading straight towards Snowdon. Keep below the line of gorse to climb a ladder-style, beyond this follow the course of a little brook on your right.

In 200 yds (183m) bear right along a wider track coming from your left and follow this to and past ruined buildings. At this point Dolwyddelan Castle is easily visible, framed by the rising heights of graceful Siabod. Climb the ladder-stile not far past the ruins, keep ahead 50 paces and then turn left (waymarked) to use a gate beside another ruin, remaining on the green field road beyond. This winds down to another metal gate; use this and walk another 30 paces before turning left at a low waymark post. Pass by two further posts and then look ahead to a latter-stile beside the middle of three gates in the field boundary. Climb this, use the nearby walker's gate through a wall and then cross the slab bridge; the path beyond follows the stream to reach an access road and the nearby main road.

Cross over and walk along the narrow lane signposted to Roman Bridge Station, keeping parallel to the railway line and passing the station on the right. Continue uphill below cliffs on the left and follow the lane as it makes a sharp right-handed bend to cross first the railway and then the River Lledr. The lane winds uphill to reach a farm complex at a left bend. 

Look on the right at this bend for a worn fingerpost pointing on to a track between barns. Take the left of two gates and rise up the slate track past sheep pens and redundant ladder-stiles. Just past the second one, fork right at a fingerpost along a grassy path, take the gate and keep ahead to and through another gate. Keep ahead here (not right) shortly passing beneath cables to reveal Dolwyddelan Castle on its craggy knoll. Climb a ladder-stile and follow the boggy track to the left of this knoll. 

Splendidly situated amidst a wild, rocky landscape and the reputed birthplace of Llywelyn the Great, Dolwyddelan Castle has a definite aura of romance and mystery about it. It was one of the principal residences of the Princes of Gwynedd, and during the English conquest it was occupied by Llywelyn ap Gruffydd, last native prince of Wales, before being captured by Edward I in 1283. At the end of the Middle Ages it fell into disuse and ruin; the main surviving parts are the fine 12th-century keep, which was partially rebuilt in the 19th century, and the 13th-century west tower. 

After passing the castle join a track coming in from the left and follow it downhill, over a bridge and along to a metal gate at a sharp corner. Go through and continue along a tree-lined, enclosed track, passing through another metal gate onto a road. Turn left to walk the 1/2 mile (800m) into Dolwyddelan, turning right in the village centre back to the parking area by the station. 
