HONG KONG , July 1 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- More than 10,000 residents of the `` New Territories '' turned up in heavy rain on the Jockey Club Street in the `` New Territories '' early this morning to welcome the arrival of the Chinese People 's Liberation Army -LRB- PLA -RRB- troops on their way to Hong Kong .
The troops , which are the main contingent of the PLA Hong Kong Garrison , entered Hong Kong at 6 a.m. through the Man Kam To checkpoint in Shenzhen .
The Jockey Club Street at the juncture linking Man Kam To with the Kowloon Highway took on a festive look , with national flags of China , the regional flags of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region -LRB- HKSAR -RRB- and color flags fluttering in wind .
Streamers expressing warm welcome to the PLA Hong Kong Garrison could been seen everywhere .
At 6 : 15 a.m. , when the vehicles were advancing on the Jockey club Street , they were cheered by the welcoming crowds from all walks of life , including primary and middle school students , who waved the national and regional flags , amid deafening sound of gongs and drums .
At a bus stop , cars carrying senior PLA officers stopped .
Major General Xiong Ziren , political commissar of the PLA Hong Kong Garrison , Wang Yufa , deputy political commissar , and Zhou Borong and Yuan Shijun , deputy commanders , got off and walked to the crowds to shake hands with and waved to the people .
Commissar Xiong and the other officers were presented with garlands by noted figures of the `` New Territories '' organizations to welcome the PLA troops , including Lee Chark Tim , president of the Hong Kong Federation of Trade Unions ; Liu Ching Leung , chairman of the `` New Territories '' Welcoming PLA Garrison Committee ; and Lee Lin Sang , head of the `` New Territories '' Association of Societies .
A teak-framed , stainless steel plaque -- five feet long and two feet high -- engraved with the words `` A Mighty and Civilized Army '' was presented to the troops .
PLA soldiers placed the plaque on an open military vehicle .
In 1898 , Britain forced the Qing Dynasty government to lease the `` New Territories '' to it .
The local residents carried out persistent struggles against the British invaders .
The residents of the `` New Territories '' have been holding a serious of celebrations to mark the return of Hong Kong to China .
