
 Changes in the membrane potential of a neuron give rise to nerve impulses

All cells have a membrane potential; however, only certain kinds of cells, including neurons and muscle cells, have the ability to generate large changes in their membrane potentials. Collectively these cells are called excitable cells. The membrane potential of an excitable cell in a resting (unexcited) state is called the resting potential. As we will see, a change in this voltage may result in an electrical impulse. Changes in the membrane potential are made possible by the specialized ion channels of excitable cells. The ion channels we have discussed so far are called ungated, since they are open all of the time. Some cells, including neurons, also have gated ion channels, which open or close in response to stimuli. The resulting change in ion concentrations may cause a change in the membrane potential in response to the stimulus. In the case of a sensory neuron, the stimulus may come from the organism's environment--for example, light in the case of photoreceptors in the eye, or vibrations in the air in the case of receptors in the ear. In the case of an interneuron, the stimulus is ordinarily produced by the other neurons that provide chemical or electrical inputs to the cell.

Gated ion channels open or close in response to only one kind of stimulus. Chemically-gated ion channels open or close in response to a chemical stimulus, such as a neurotransmitter released from a synaptic terminal. Voltage-gated ion channels respond to a change in membrane potential. In addition, a gated ion channel (like other ion channels) allows only one kind of ion to pass through it. Thus, there are chemically-gated sodium channels and chemically-gated potassium channels, as well as voltage-gated sodium channels and voltage-gated potassium channels. Each type of channel plays an essential role in the generation and transmission of electrical signals.

Graded Potentials: Hyperpolarization and Depolarization

A change in membrane potential is a localized electrical event at the point of stimulation. Let us consider what happens in a region of a dendrite that is stimulated by a neurotransmitter. The specific effect of this stimulus on membrane polarization depends on the type of chemically-gated ion channel that is opened. FIGURE 48.8a and b show two types of local responses. Some stimuli trigger a hyperpolarization, an increase in the voltage across the membrane (FIGURE 48.8a). One of the ways a stimulus can produce a hyperpolarization is by opening a potassium channel, which increases K+ outflow and causes the inside of the cell to become more negative. In contrast, a depolarization is a reduction in the voltage across the membrane (FIGURE 48.8b). One of the ways this can occur is by a stimulus opening a sodium channel; the increased inflow of Na+ makes the inside of the cell less negative. These voltage changes are called graded potentials because the magnitude of change (either hyperpolarization or depolarization) depends on the strength of the stimulus: A larger stimulus will open more channels, producing a larger change in permeability and thus a larger change in the membrane potential.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-8. Graded potentials and the action potential in a neuron. Environmental changes can alter the cell's membrane potential. (a) One way a neuron can be hyperpolarized is by stimuli that open potassium channels. (b) A neuron can be depolarized by stimuli that open sodium channels. (c) A depolarizing stimulus of sufficient strength will change the membrane potential to a critical level called the threshold potential. This triggers an action potential, or nerve impulse. Unlike a graded potential, an action potential is an all-or-none event; the size of the action potential is not affected by the strength of the stimulus that triggered it.

The Action Potential: All or Nothing Depolarization

Depolarization of a neuron's plasma membrane is graded with stimulus intensity only up to a particular voltage, called the threshold potential. If a sufficiently strong stimulus causes depolarization to reach this threshold, it triggers a different type of response, called an action potential (FIGURE 48.8c). In a neuron, an action potential can be generated only in the axon. The action potential is typically triggered by a graded depolarization that originates in a dendrite or in the cell body and spreads along the membrane to the axon. The threshold potential is typically about 15 to 20 mV more positive than the resting potential--that is, about -50 to -55 mV for the plasma membrane of an axon. Hyperpolarizing stimuli do not produce action potentials; in fact, as we will see, hyperpolarization makes it more difficult for a stimulus to raise the membrane potential to threshold.

The action potential of an axon is the nerve impulse. It is a nongraded all-or-none event, meaning that the magnitude of the action potential is independent of the strength of the depolarizing stimulus that triggered it, provided the depolarization reaches threshold. Once an action potential is triggered, the membrane potential goes through a stereotypical sequence of changes, illustrated in FIGURE 48.9. The membrane polarity reverses abruptly, with the interior of the cell becoming positive with respect to the outside. This reversal (the spike in the graph) is followed by a rapid repolarizing phase, during which the membrane potential returns to its resting level. The whole event is typically over within a few milliseconds.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-9. The role of voltage-gated ion channels in the action potential. The circled numbers on the action potential graph correspond to the five diagrams of voltage-gated sodium and potassium channels in a neuron's plasma membrane.

Note that an action potential is an example of positive feedback (see Chapter 1). Depolarization of an axon's membrane to the threshold potential triggers an even larger depolarization, the action potential.

The action potential arises because the plasma membranes of axons have voltage-gated ion channels. The gates of these ion channels open and close in response to changes in membrane potential, controlling rapid influx and efflux of ions. Voltage-gated channels are activated when graded depolarization of an axon's membrane reaches the threshold level. Two types of voltage-gated channels, sodium channels and potassium channels, contribute to the action potential (see FIGURE 48.9). Each voltage-gated potassium channel has a single voltage-sensitive gate that is closed in the resting state and opens slowly in response to depolarization. By contrast, each voltage-gated sodium channel has two voltage-sensitive gates: 1) an activation gate that is closed in the resting state and opens rapidly in response to depolarization; and 2) an inactivation gate that is open in the resting state and closes slowly in response to depolarization.

What is the status of the voltage-gated channels in the instant after a threshold potential is reached? The K+ gates are opening slowly, and K+ is beginning to trickle out of the cell. At the same instant, Na+ is gushing into the cell because the activation gates of the Na+ channels are wide open, but the inactivation gates are just beginning to close slowly. It is this rapid influx of Na+ relative to the K+ efflux that accounts for the voltage change called the action potential.

Note in FIGURE 48.9 that the action potential spikes, with the rapid depolarization followed immediately by a repolarization that is just as rapid. Two factors underlie this repolarizing phase of the action potential as the membrane potential is returned to its resting state. First, the sodium channel inactivation gate, which is slow to respond to changes in voltage, has time to respond to depolarization by closing, returning sodium permeability to its low resting level. Second, potassium channels, whose voltage-sensitive gates also respond relatively slowly to depolarization, have had time to open. As a result, K+ flows rapidly out of the cell during repolarization, helping restore the internal negativity of the resting neuron. The potassium channel gates are also the main cause of an undershoot, or hyperpolarization, that follows the repolarizing phase (see FIGURE 48.9). Instead of returning immediately to their resting position, these relatively slow-moving gates remain open during the undershoot, allowing potassium to keep flowing out of the neuron. The continued potassium outflow makes the membrane potential more negative than the resting potential--that is, it hyperpolarizes the membrane.

Notice that during the undershoot, both the activation gate and the inactivation gate of the sodium channel are closed. If a second depolarizing stimulus arrives during this period, it will be unable to trigger an action potential because the inactivation gates have not had time to reopen after the preceding action potential. This period when the neuron is insensitive to depolarization is called the refractory period, and it sets the limit on the maximum frequency with which action potentials can be generated.

If the action potential is an all-or-none event with amplitude (size) unaffected by the intensity of the stimulus, how can the nervous system distinguish strong stimuli from weaker ones that are still sufficient to trigger action potentials? Strong stimuli result in a greater frequency of action potentials than weaker stimuli; if a stimulus is intense, the neuron will fire repeatedly, producing action potentials as rapidly as the refractory period will allow. Thus, it is the number of action potentials per second, not their amplitude, that codes for stimulus intensity in the nervous system.




