
 Chlorophyta: Green algae and plants evolved from a common photoautotrophic ancestor

Green algae (chlorophytes and charophyceans in FIGURE 28.8) are named for their grass-green chloroplasts, which are much like those of organisms we traditionally call plants in ultrastructure and pigment composition. Molecular systematics and cellular morphology leave little doubt that green algae and land plants are closely related. In fact, some systematists now advocate inclusion of green algae in an expanded kingdom, the Viridiplantae of FIGURE 28.8 (Latin viridis, green). The common ancestor of green algae and plants probably had chloroplasts derived from cyanobacteria by primary endosymbiosis. Among green algae, those called charophyceans are especially closely related to land plants, and we will discuss them along with the plants in the next chapter. Here our survey of green algae features the chlorophytes (from the Greek chloros, green).

More than 7,000 species of chlorophytes have been identified. Most live in fresh water, but there are also many marine species. Various species of unicellular chlorophytes live as plankton or inhabit damp soil or snow; some species live symbiotically within other eukaryotes, contributing portions of their photosynthetic products to the food supply of the hosts. Chlorophytes are among the algae that live symbiotically with fungi in the mutualistic collectives known as lichens (see FIGURE 31.16).

The simplest chlorophytes are biflagellated unicells such as Chlamydomonas, which resemble the gametes and zoospores of more complex chlorophytes. In addition to unicellular chlorophytes, there are colonial species, as well as many multicellular filamentous forms that contribute to the stringy masses known as pond scum. There are also multicellular chlorophytes, with bodies large and complex enough that marine species qualify as seaweeds along with the large brown algae and red algae.

Larger size and greater complexity have evolved by three different mechanisms: (1) the formation of colonies of individual cells, as seen in species of Volvox (FIGURE 28.23a); (2) the repeated division of nuclei with no cytoplasmic division, as seen in multinucleate filaments of Caulerpa (FIGURE 28.23b); and (3) the formation of true multicellular forms by cell division and cell differentiation, as in Ulva (FIGURE 28.23c).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 28-23. Colonial and multicellular chlorophytes.

Most green algae have complex life histories, with both sexual and asexual reproductive stages. Nearly all reproduce sexually by way of biflagellated gametes having cup-shaped chloroplasts (FIGURE 28.24). The exceptions are the conjugating algae, such as Spirogyra, which produce amoeboid gametes. Alternation of generations evolved in the life cycles of some green algae, including the Ulva of FIGURE 28.23c.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 28-24. The life cycle of Chlamydomonas. This unicellular chlorophyte exhibits sexual as well as asexual reproduction.

Throughout our survey of protists so far, we have encountered algae, or photosynthetic protists, as members of several different clades, often alongside heterotrophic members of the same clades. Recall from FIGURE 28.5 that different episodes of secondary endosymbiosis account for the diversity of protists with plastids. As a follow-up to that illustration, FIGURE 28.25 (p. 568) places the algal groups we've discussed in the context of their plastids' origins.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 28-25. A hypothetical history of plastids in the photosynthetic eukaryotes. In this simplified model, the host cells in the endosymbiotic episodes are illustrated without their nuclei and mitochondria; here we are concerned only with the origin of the plastids in diverse eukaryotic groups. Note that this "plastid phylogeny" is not the same as a phylogeny of the organisms themselves. The heterokont algae, for example, did not evolve from red algae, but from some heterotrophic protist that engulfed a red alga. Note also that the dinoflagellates have plastids of diverse origins, including via tertiary endosymbiosis of an alga. But the host cells in the various endosymbiotic origins of dinoflagellate plastids were probably closely related as members of the alveolate group.




