
 The polarity of water molecules results in hydrogen bonding

Studied in isolation, the water molecule is deceptively simple. Its two hydrogen atoms are joined to the oxygen atom by single covalent bonds. Because oxygen is more electronegative than hydrogen, the electrons of the polar bonds spend more time closer to the oxygen atom. In other words, the bonds that hold together the atoms in a water molecule are polar covalent bonds, with the oxygen region of the molecule having a partial negative charge and the hydrogens having a partial positive charge. The water molecule, shaped something like a wide V, is a polar molecule, meaning that opposite ends of the molecule have opposite charges (see figure 2.13).

The anomalous properties of water arise from attractions between these polar molecules. The attraction is electrical; a slightly positive hydrogen of one molecule is attracted to the slightly negative oxygen of a nearby molecule. The two molecules are thus held together by a hydrogen bond (FIGURE 3.1). Each water molecule can form hydrogen bonds to a maximum of four neighbors, and at any given moment, many of the molecules in a sample of liquid water are linked in this way. The extraordinary qualities of water are emergent properties resulting from the hydrogen bonding that orders molecules into a higher level of structural organization.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 3-1. Hydrogen bonds between water molecules. The charged regions of a polar water molecule are attracted to oppositely charged parts of neighboring molecules. (The oxygen has a slight negative charge; the hydrogens have a slight positive charge.) Each molecule can hydrogen-bond to a maximum of four partners. At any instant in liquid water at 37&#176;C (human body temperature), about 15% of the molecules are bonded to four partners in short-lived clusters.

We will examine four of water's properties that contribute to the fitness of Earth as an environment for life: water's cohesive behavior, its ability to stabilize temperature, its expansion upon freezing, and its versatility as a solvent.




