
 Mutation and sexual recombination generate genetic variation

Two random processes, mutation and sexual recombination (see Chapter 15), create variation in the gene pool of a population.

Mutation

New alleles originate only by mutation, or change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA. A mutation affecting any gene locus is an accident that is rare and random. Most mutations occur in somatic cells and are lost when the individual dies. Only muta tions that occur in cell lines that produce gametes can be passed along to offspring.

A mutation is like a shot in the dark: Chance determines where it will strike and how it will alter a gene. Most point mutations, those affecting a single base in DNA, are probably relatively harmless. Much of the DNA in the eukaryotic genome does not code for protein products, and it is uncertain how a change of a single nucleotide base in this silent DNA will affect the well-being of the organism. Even mutations of structural genes, which do code for proteins, may occur with little or no effect on the organism, partly because of redundancy in the genetic code. Of course, a single point mutation can have a significant impact on phenotype, as in sickle-cell disease, for example (see FIGURE 5.19).

A mutation that alters a protein enough to affect its function is more often harmful than beneficial. Organisms are the refined products of thousands of generations of past selection, and a random change is not likely to improve the genome any more than blindly firing a gunshot through the hood of a car is likely to improve engine performance. On rare occasions, however, a mutant allele may actually fit its bearer to the environment better and enhance the reproductive success of the individual. This is not especially likely in a stable environment but becomes more probable when the environment is changing and mutations that were once selected against are now favorable under the new conditions. For example, mutations that happen to endow HIV with resistance to antiviral drugs also slow the reproductive rate of the virus (see Chapter 22). Once the drugs were in the environment, the mutant alleles were favored, and natural selection increased their frequency in HIV populations.

Chromosomal mutations that disrupt many gene loci are almost certain to have negative effects on the development of the organism. However, when chromosomal rearrangements leave genes intact, their effects on organisms may be neutral, as in FIGURE 23.9. Rearrangements of chromosomes may in rare instances bring benefits. For example, the translocation of a chromosomal piece could link alleles that affect the organism in some positive way when they are inherited together as a package.

Duplications of chromosome segments, like other chromosomal mutations, are nearly always harmful. But if the repeated segment does not disrupt genetic balance severely, it can persist over the generations and provide an expanded genome with superfluous loci that may eventually take on new functions by mutation. New genes may also arise from transpositions of existing DNA sequences or by the shuffling of exons within the genome, either within a single locus or between loci (see Chapter 19).

In microorganisms with very short generation spans, mutation generates genetic variation very rapidly. For example, HIV has a generation span of about two days. In an AIDS patient, the HIV infection produces 1010 or more new viruses per day. Each replication provides a chance for errors--mutations--to occur. In addition, HIV has an RNA genome, which has a much higher mutation rate than DNA genomes. The combined mutation and replication rates mean that in a single day, the HIV population in one human body will generate mutations in every site in the HIV genome. For this reason, single-drug treatments will probably never be effective for long against HIV. Even double-drug treatments are rarely effective for long, because individual viruses with double mutations conferring resistance to both drugs arise daily. This explains why the most effective AIDS treatments are drug "cocktails," combinations of several drugs. Compared to single and double mutations, it is far less probable that multiple mutations against all the drugs will turn up in individual viruses in a short time period.

Bacterial populations can also evolve rapidly by the explosive asexual expansion of mutant clones favored by the local environment. However, on a generation-to-generation time scale, animals and plants depend mainly on sexual recombination for the genetic variation that makes adaptation possible.

Sexual Recombination

Members of a sexually reproducing population owe nearly all their genetic differences to the unique recombinations of existing alleles each individual receives from the gene pool. (Of course, this allele variation has its ultimate basis in past mutations.)

Sex shuffles alleles and deals them at random to determine individual genotypes. During meiosis, homologous chromosomes, one inherited from each parent, trade some of their genes by crossing over, and then the homologous chromosomes and the alleles they carry segregate randomly into separate gametes. Gametes from one individual vary extensively in their genetic makeup, and each zygote made by a mating pair has a unique assortment of alleles resulting from the random union of a sperm and an ovum (see Chapter 13). A population, of course, contains a vast number of possible mating combinations, each bringing together the gametes of individuals that are likely to have different genetic backgrounds. Sexual reproduction recombines old alleles into fresh assortments every generation.




