
Chapter 55: CONSERVATION BIOLOGY

THE BIODIVERSITY CRISIS

   The three levels of biodiversity are genetic diversity, species diversity, and ecosystem diversity

   Biodiversity at all three levels is vital to human welfare

   The four major threats to biodiversity are habitat destruction, introduced species, overexploitation, and food chain disruptions



CONSERVATION AT THE POPULATION AND SPECIES LEVELS

   According to the small-population approach, a population's small size can draw it into an extinction vortex

   The declining-population approach is a proactive conservation strategy for detecting, diagnosing, and halting population declines

   Conserving species involves weighing conflicting demands



CONSERVATION AT THE COMMUNITY, ECOSYSTEM, AND LANDSCAPE LEVELS

   Edges and corridors can strongly influence landscape biodiversity

   Conservation biologists face many challenges in setting up protected areas

   Nature reserves must be functional parts of landscapes

   Restoring degraded areas is an increasingly important conservation effort

   The goal of sustainable development is reorienting ecological research and challenging all of us to reassess our values

   The future of the biosphere may depend on our biophilia

Biology is the science of life. Thus, it is fitting that our final chapter be about preserving life. Conservation biology is a goal-oriented science that seeks to counter the biodiversity crisis, the current rapid decrease in Earth's great variety of life.

To date, scientists have described and formally named about 1.5 million species of organisms. We can only estimate how many more currently exist. Some biologists believe that the number is about 10 million, but others estimate it to be between 30 million and 80 million. Some of the greatest concentrations of species are found in the tropics, where the scene in the photograph on this page is commonplace: tropical forests (such as the one in Ecuador shown here) being destroyed at an alarming rate to make room for and support a burgeoning human population.

Throughout the biosphere, human activities are altering trophic structures, energy flow, chemical cycling, and natural disturbance--ecosystem processes on which we and other species depend. The amount of human-altered land surface is approaching 50% , and we use over half of all accessible surface fresh water. In the oceans, stocks of many fishes are being depleted by overharvest, and some of the most productive and diverse areas, such as coral reefs and estuaries, are being severely stressed. By some estimates, we are in the process of doing more damage to the biosphere and pushing more species toward extinction than the large asteroid that seems to have triggered the mass extinctions at the close of the Cretaceous period 65 million years ago (seeFIGURE 25.6). Globally, the rate of species loss may be as much as 1,000 times higher than at any time in the past 100,000 years.

In this chapter, we take a closer look at the biodiversity crisis and at the science of conservation biology. We will examine some of the research and conservation strategies biologists are using in attempts to slow the rate of species loss. Along the way, we will see that conservation biology relies on research at all levels of ecology, from populations to ecosystems and landscapes.




