
 Phylum Porifera: Sponges are sessile with porous bodies and choanocytes

Sponges are sessile animals that appear so sedate to the human eye that the ancient Greeks believed them to be plants. Sponges have no nerves or muscles, but the individual cells can sense and react to changes in the environment.

Sponges range in height from about 1 cm to 2 m. Of the 9,000 or so species of sponges, only about 100 live in fresh water; the rest are marine. The body of a simple sponge resembles a sac perforated with holes (Porifera means pore bearer; FIGURE 33.2). Water is drawn through the pores into a central cavity, the spongocoel, then flows out of the sponge through a larger opening called the osculum. More complex sponges have folded body walls, and many contain branched water canals and several oscula. Under certain conditions, the cells around the pores and osculum contract, closing the openings.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-2. A sponge. Sessile animals without specialized organs and tissues, sponges filter food from water pumped through their porous bodies. The diverse species of sponges vary in shape, color, and structural complexity. Some species are brightly pigmented by symbiotic algae. This is an azure vase sponge, Callyspongia plicifera.

Nearly all sponges are suspension-feeders (also known as filter-feeders), which are animals that collect food particles from water passed through some type of food-trapping equipment. Sponges trap food from the water circulated through the porous body. To obtain enough food to grow by 100 g (about 3 ounces), a sponge must filter 1,000 kg (about 275 gallons) of seawater. Lining the inside of the spongocoel or internal water chambers are flagellated choanocytes, or collar cells (for the membranous collar around the base of the flagellum). The flagella generate a water current, and the collars trap food particles that the choanocytes then ingest by phagocytosis (FIGURE 33.3). The similarity between choanocytes and the cells of choanoflagellates reinforces the molecular evidence in supporting the hypothesis of an animal origin from a choanoflagellate ancestor.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-3. Anatomy of a sponge. The wall of this simple sponge has two layers of cells separated by a gelatinous matrix, the mesohyl ("middle matter"). The outer layer consists of tightly packed epidermal cells. The incurrent pores are channels through porocytes, cells shaped like elongated doughnuts that span the body wall. The spongocoel is lined mainly by choanocytes, each with a flagellum ringed by a collar of fingerlike projections coated with mucus. Beating flagella sweep large volumes of water (arrows) into the body through the incurrent pores. Food particles are trapped in mucus on the collar, phagocytosed, and digested within choanocytes and adjacent amoebocytes. Mobile amoebocytes transport nutrients to other cells of the body and also produce materials for skeletal fibers (spicules).

The body of a sponge consists of two layers of cells separated by a gelatinous region called the mesohyl. Wandering through the mesohyl are cells called amoebocytes, named for their use of pseudopodia. Amoebocytes have many functions. They take up food from the water and from choanocytes, digest it, and carry nutrients to other cells. Amoebocytes also form tough skeletal fibers within the mesohyl. In some groups of sponges, these fibers are sharp spicules made from calcium carbonate or silica; other sponges produce more flexible fibers composed of a collagen protein called spongin. We use these pliant, honeycombed skeletons as bath sponges.

Most sponges are hermaphrodites (from the Greek Hermes, the god, and Aphrodite, the goddess), meaning that each individual functions as both male and female in sexual reproduction by producing sperm and eggs. Gametes arise from choanocytes or amoebocytes. Eggs reside in the mesohyl, but sperm cells are carried out of the sponge by the water current. Cross-fertilization results from some of the sperm being drawn into neighboring individuals. Fertilization occurs in the mesohyl, where the zygotes develop into flagellated, swimming larvae that disperse from the parent. Upon settling on a suitable substratum, a larva develops into the sessile adult.

Sponges are capable of extensive regeneration, the replacement of lost parts. They use regeneration not only for repair but also to reproduce asexually from fragments broken off a parent sponge.




