
 The future of the biosphere may depend on our biophilia

Despite the uncertainties about the future of the biosphere, now is not the time for gloom and doom but the time to reconnect with the rest of nature. Not many people today live in truly wild environments or even visit such places often. Our modern lives are very different from those of early humans, who hunted and gathered and painted wildlife murals on cave walls. But our behavior reflects remnants of our ancestral attachment to nature and the diversity of life--what Edward O. Wilson calls biophilia (FIGURE 55.23). Biophilia includes our sense of connection to diverse organisms and also our attraction to pristine landscapes with clean water and lush vegetation. We evolved in natural environments rich in biodiversity, and we still have an affinity for such settings. Wilson makes the case that our biophilia is innate, an evolutionary product of natural selection acting on a brainy species whose survival depended on a close connection to the environment and a practical appreciation of plants and animals.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 55-23. Biophilia, past and present. (a) Art history goes way back--and so does our fascination with and dependence on biodiversity. A Cro-Magnon wildlife artist created this remarkable painting of rhinoceroses about 30,000 years ago. Three cave explorers found the painting in a prehistoric art gallery on Christmas Eve, 1994, when they ventured into a cavern near Vallon-Pont d'Arc, in southern France. (b) Biologist Carlos Rivera Gonzales, who is participating in a biodiversity survey in a remote region of Peru, could not resist a closer look at a tiny tree frog.

It will come as no surprise that most biologists have embraced the concept of biophilia. After all, these are people who have turned their passion for nature into careers. But biophilia strikes a harmonic chord with biologists for another reason. If biophilia is evolutionarily embedded in our genomes, then there is hope that we can become better custodians of the biosphere. If we all pay more attention to our biophilia, a new environmental ethic could catch on among individuals and societies. And that ethic is a resolve never to knowingly allow a single species to become extinct or any ecosystem to be destroyed as long as there are reasonable ways to prevent such ecological violence. It is an environmental ethic that balances out another human trait--our tendency to "subdue Earth." Yes, we should be motivated to preserve biodiversity because we depend on it for food, medicine, building materials, fertile soil, flood control, habitable climate, drinkable water, and breathable air. But maybe we can also work harder to prevent the extinction of other forms of life just because it is the ethical thing for us to do as the most thoughtful species in the biosphere. Again, Wilson sounds the call: "Right now, we're pushing the species of the world through a bottleneck. We've got to make it a major moral principle to get as many of them through this as possible. It's the challenge now and for the next century. And there's one good thing about our species: We like a challenge!"

It is appropriate that we end this textbook with biophilia, for biology is a scientific expression of our desire to know nature. We are most likely to save what we appreciate, and we are most likely to appreciate what we understand. By learning about the processes and diversity of life, we also become more aware of ourselves and our place in the biosphere. We hope this book serves you well in this lifelong adventure.




