
 The declining-population approach is a proactive conservation strategy for detecting, diagnosing, and halting population declines

We saw that the small-population approach emphasizes minimum viable population size and the extinction vortex as ways to understand the extinction process. There are, of course, interventions based on small-population theory, including introducing genetic variation from one population to another. But the declining-population approach is even more action oriented, focusing on threatened and endangered populations even if they are far greater than minimum viable size. To conservation biologists who lean toward this approach, a downward trend in a species may be cause for alarm and, when possible, corrective action.

The distinction between a declining population (which may be small) and a small population (which may be declining) is less important than the different priorities of the two basic conservation approaches. Practitioners of both the small-population and declining-population approaches recognize that most modern extinctions are due to the human factors of habitat destruction, introduced species, and overexploitation. But the small-population approach emphasizes smallness itself as an ultimate cause of a population's extinction, especially through loss of genetic diversity. In contrast, the declining-population approach emphasizes the environmental factors that caused a population decline in the first place. If, for example, an area is deforested, then species that depend on trees will decline and become locally extinct, whether or not they retain genetic variation.

The declining-population approach requires that population declines be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, with researchers carefully dissecting the causes of a decline before recommending or trying corrective measures. If, for example, the biological magnification of a particular toxic pollutant is causing a decline in some top-level consumer such as a predatory bird, then only reduction or elimination of the poison in the environment can save that particular species. Rarely is the situation so straightforward, but there are procedures to help with even complex cases.

Steps in the Diagnosis and Treatment of Declining Populations

Like all scientific processes, analyses in conservation biology rarely follow exact formulas for investigation, but we can identify a series of logical steps that are common in the declining-population approach:

Confirm that the species is presently in decline or that it was formerly more widely distributed or more abundant. This step requires assessment of population trends and distribution.

Study the species' natural history to determine its environmental requirements. Existing research literature on the natural history of this or related species may help with this step.

Determine all the possible causes of the decline. In listing all possible hypotheses for the decline, human activities that could contribute to losses may become evident, but hypotheses cannot be restricted to human causes. For example, a series of unusually harsh winters could cause local declines in populations of certain species.

List the predictions of each hypothesis for the decline. Ideally, the investigation would emphasize contrasting predictions based on the different hypotheses (see Chapter 1).

Test the most likely hypothesis first, designing an experiment to determine if this factor is the main cause of the decline. Many factors may be correlated with the decline without being the direct cause. In the ideal experiment, researchers remove the suspected agent of decline to see if the experimental population rebounds relative to a control population. It may turn out that there are multiple causes of decline.

Apply the results of this diagnosis to the management of the threatened species. This requires monitoring recovery until the problem of decline is resolved.

As with our discussion of the small-population approach, the declining-population approach will seem less abstract in the context of a case study.

Case Study: Diagnosing and Treating the Decline of the Red-Cockaded Woodpecker

To practice conservation biology, we must understand the often subtle habitat requirements of an endangered species. The red-cockaded woodpecker (Picoides borealis) is an endangered, endemic species (found nowhere else) originally found throughout the southeastern United States. This species requires mature pine forests, preferably ones dominated by the longleaf pine. Such habitats have been destroyed or fragmented by logging and agriculture. Most woodpeckers nest in dead trees, but the red-cockaded woodpecker drills its nest holes in mature, living pine trees (FIGURE 55.14a). The heartwood (deep wood) of mature longleaf pines is usually rotted and softened by fungi, allowing the woodpeckers adequate space for nesting once they excavate into the heartwood. Red-cockaded woodpeckers also drill small holes around the entrance to their nest cavity, which causes resin from the tree to ooze down the trunk. The resin seems to repel certain predators, such as corn snakes, that eat bird eggs and nestlings.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 55-14. Habitat requirements of the red-cockaded woodpecker. (a) A red-cockaded woodpecker at the entrance to its nest site in a longleaf pine tree (b) Forest that can sustain red-cockaded woodpeckers has low undergrowth (c) Forest that cannot sustain red-cockaded woodpeckers has high, dense undergrowth that impacts the woodpeckers' access to feeding grounds

Another critical habitat factor for this woodpecker is that the understory of plants around the pine trunks must be of low profile (FIGURE 55.14b). Breeding birds tend to abandon nests when vegetation among the pines is thick and higher than about 15 feet (FIGURE 55.14c). Apparently, the birds require a clear flight path between their home trees and the neighboring feeding grounds. Historically, periodic fires swept through longleaf pine forests, keeping the undergrowth low.

The recent recovery of the red-cockaded woodpecker from near extinction to sustainable populations was achieved by recognizing the key habitat factors and protecting some longleaf pine forests that support viable numbers of the birds. The use of controlled fires to reduce forest undergrowth helps maintain mature pine trees as well as the woodpeckers.

Designing a recovery program for the red-cockaded woodpecker was complicated by the social organization of this species. These birds live in groups of a breeding pair and up to four helpers, mostly males. Helpers do not breed but assist in incubating eggs and feeding nestlings. Some young birds disperse to new territories, but most remain behind as helpers to breeders. They may eventually attain breeding status when older birds die, but the wait may take years, and even then, helpers must compete to fill breeding vacancies. Young birds that disperse as members of new groups also have a tough path to reproductive success. New groups usually occupy abandoned territories or start at a new site and must excavate the cavities needed for nesting. This nest building can take several years. Individuals generally have a better chance of reproducing by remaining behind and competing when breeding vacancies open than by dispersing and excavating homes in new territories. Perhaps this behavioral feature contributed to the decline of the red-cockaded woodpecker.

Ecologists tested the hypothesis that behavior constrains the ability of red-cockaded woodpecker populations to rebound by constructing cavities in pine trees at 20 sites in North Carolina. The results were dramatic: 18 of the 20 sites were colonized by red-cockaded woodpeckers, and new breeding groups formed only in areas where artificial cavities were drilled. The experiment supported the hypothesis that this woodpecker species was leaving much suitable habitat unoccupied because of an absence of breeding cavities. And the research informed a management strategy for reversing the decline of the red-cockaded woodpecker. A combination of controlled burning to clear understory vegetation and excavation of breeding cavities in unoccupied areas that provide good habitat has enabled a once endangered species to rebound. This example of the declining-population approach to conservation biology illustrates the need for case-by-case investigation of the factors contributing to a species' decline.




