
THE STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND REPRODUCTION OF PROKARYOTES

 

 Nearly all prokaryotes have a cell wall external to the plasma membrane



 

 Many prokaryotes are motile



 

 The cellular and genomic organization of prokaryotes is fundamentally different from that of eukaryotes



 

 Populations of prokaryotes grow and adapt rapidly



Most prokaryotes are unicellular. However, some species tend to aggregate transiently in groups of two or more cells. Others have the form of true colonies, which are permanent aggregates of identical cells. And in some species of prokaryotes, there is even a division of labor between two or more specialized types of cells.

There is a diversity of cell shapes among prokaryotes, the three most common being spheres (cocci), rods (bacilli), and helices (including the bacteria known as spirilla and spirochetes). An important step in identifying prokaryotes is determining their shape by microscopic examination (FIGURE 27.3).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 27-3. The most common shapes of prokaryotes. (a) Cocci (singular, coccus), or spherical prokaryotes, occur singly, in pairs (diplo cocci), in chains of many cells (streptococci, shown here), and in clusters resembling bunches of grapes (staphylococci). (b) Rod-shaped prokaryotes, or bacilli (singular, bacillus), are usually solitary, but in some forms the rods are arranged in chains. (c) Helical prokaryotes include the spirilla and the corkscrew-shaped spirochetes. (All colorized SEMs.)

Most prokaryotes have diameters in the range of 1-5 &uuml;m, compared to 10-100 &uuml;m for the majority of eukaryotic cells. There are, however notable exceptions; the largest prokaryote discovered so far measures about 0.75 mm in diameter, dwarfing most eukaryotic cells (FIGURE 27.4).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 27-4. The largest known prokaryote. The bright ball in the upper left is a marine bacterium with cells almost as large as a fruit fly's head (included in the photo for scale). The two smaller cells above the bright one are dead. Researchers who discovered the giant prokaryote in 1997 named it Thiomargarita namibiensis, which means "sulfur pearl of Namibia." It uses sulfur compounds in its metabolism and inhabits coastal sediments in the African country of Namibia.




