
Chapter 18: MICROBIAL MODELS: THE GENETICS OF VIRUSES AND BACTERIA

THE GENETICS OF VIRUSES

   Researchers discovered viruses by studying a plant disease

   A virus is a genome enclosed in a protective coat

   Viruses can reproduce only within a host cell: an overview

   Phages reproduce using lytic or lysogenic cycles

   Animal viruses are diverse in their modes of infection and replication

   Plant viruses are serious agricultural pests

   Viroids and prions are infectious agents even simpler than viruses

   Viruses may have evolved from other mobile genetic elements



THE GENETICS OF BACTERIA

   The short generation span of bacteria helps them adapt to changing environments

   Genetic recombination produces new bacterial strains

   The control of gene expression enables individual bacteria to adjust their metabolism to environmental change

The drawing that opens this chapter dramatizes a remarkable event: the genetic takeover of a cell by a virus. In this case, the cell is the bacterium E. coli, and the virus, looking something like a miniature lunar landing craft, is the bacteriophage T4. The phage is infecting the cell by injecting its DNA. InFIGURE 16.2, you met a closely related virus, T2, which helped prove that DNA is the genetic material. Molecular biology was born in the laboratories of microbiologists studying such viruses and bacteria. Microbiologists provided most of the evidence that genes are made of DNA, and they worked out the major steps of DNA replication, transcription, and translation, the three main processes in the flow of genetic information. Viruses and bacteria are the simplest biological systems--microbial models where scientists find life's fundamental molecular mechanisms in their most basic, accessible forms.

The value of viruses and bacteria as model systems in biological research is just one reason to learn about these microbes. While microbial models have helped biologists understand the molecular genetics of more complex organisms, viruses and bacteria also have unique features that make their genetics interesting in their own right. These specialized mechanisms have important applications for understanding how viruses and bacteria cause disease. In addition, techniques enabling scientists to manipulate genes and transfer them from one organism to another have emerged from the study of microbes. These techniques are having an important impact on both basic research and biotechnology (see Chapter 20).

In this chapter, we explore the genetics of viruses and bacteria. Recall that bacteria are prokaryotic organisms, with cells much smaller and more simply organized than those of eukaryotes, such as plants and animals. Viruses are smaller and simpler still, lacking the structures and most of the metabolic machinery found in cells (FIGURE 18.1). In fact, most viruses are little more than aggregates of nucleic acid and protein--genes packaged in protein coats. It is with these simplest of all genetic systems that we begin.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 18-1. Comparing the size of a virus, a bacterium, and a eukaryotic cell. By studying viruses and bacteria, the simplest biological systems, scientists caught their first glimpses of the elegant molecular mechanisms of heredity.




