
 Molecular biology is revolutionizing the study of plants

Plant biology is in the midst of a renaissance. New laboratory and field methods coupled with clever choices of experimental organisms have catalyzed a research explosion. For example, many scientists interested in the genetic control of plant development, including Joanne Chory, whom you met in the interview on pages 718-719, are focusing their research on Arabidopsis thaliana, a little weed of the mustard family (FIGURE 35.25). Arabidopsis is small enough to allow researchers to cultivate thousands of the plants in a few square meters of lab space. Arabidopsis also has a short generation span of about six weeks, making it an excellent model for genetic studies. Plant biologists are also attracted to Arabidopsis by its tiny genome; the amount of DNA per cell ranks among the least of all known plants. Because of these attributes, Arabidopsis was the first plant to have its entire genome sequenced, a multinational effort that took six years to complete.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-25. Arabidopsis thaliana. Owing to its small size, rapid life cycle, and small genome, Arabidopsis (inset) was the first plant to have its entire genome sequenced (some 26,000 genes). The pie chart represents the proportion of Arabidopsis genes in different functional categories.

Arabidopsis possesses about 26,000 genes, but many of these are duplicates--there are probably fewer than 15,000 different types of genes. This level of complexity is similar to that found in the fly Drosophila. Knowing what some of the Arabidopsis genes do has already expanded our understanding of plant development. However, the functions of about 45%  of Arabidopsis';s genes are unknown (FIGURE 35.25).

Now that the DNA sequence of the Arabidopsis genome is completely known, plant biologists have launched an ambitious quest to determine the function of every one of the plant's genes by the year 2010. By identifying each gene's function and tracking every chemical pathway, researchers aim to establish a blueprint for how plants are built. One of the key tasks will be to identify exactly which cells are manufacturing which gene products and at what stages in the plant's life. Researchers also plan to create mutants for every gene in the genome. As Joanne Chory predicted, it may one day be possible to create a computer-generated "virtual plant" that will enable researchers to visualize which plant genes are activated in different parts of the plant during the entire course of development.




