
 The ovary develops into a fruit adapted for seed dispersal

As the seeds are developing from ovules, the ovary of the flower is developing into a fruit, which protects the enclosed seeds and aids in their dispersal by wind or animals. Pollination triggers hormonal changes that cause the ovary to begin its transformation into a fruit (FIGURE 38.12). If a flower has not been pollinated, fruit usually does not develop, and the entire flower withers and falls away.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 38-12. Development of a pea fruit (pod). (Also, see FIGURE 30.15.) These photographs illustrate the changes in a pea plant leading to pod formation. (a) Soon after pollination, (b) the flower drops its petals, and hormonal changes make the ovary start growing. The ovary expands, and its wall thickens, (c) forming the pod, or fruit.

During fruit development, the wall of the ovary becomes the pericarp, the thickened wall of the fruit. As the ovary grows, the other parts of the flower wither and are shed. (The pointed tip of the pea pod in FIGURE 38.12 is the withered remains of the pea flower's stigma.) However, in some angiosperms, other floral parts also contribute to what we call a fruit in grocery store vernacular. In apple flowers, for example, the ovary is embedded in the receptacle (see FIGURE 38.2), and the fleshy part of the fruit is derived mainly from the swollen receptacle; only the core of the apple fruit develops from the ovary. Fruits are classified into several types, depending on their developmental origin (see TABLE 30.1).

The fruit usually ripens about the same time that its seeds are completing their development. For a dry fruit such as a soybean pod, ripening is little more than senescence (aging) of the fruit tissues, which allows the fruit to open and release the seeds. The ripening of a fleshy fruit is more elaborate, its steps controlled by the complex interactions of hormones. In this case, ripening results in an edible fruit that serves as an enticement to the animals that help spread the seeds. The "pulp" of the fruit becomes softer as a result of enzymes digesting components of the cell walls. There is usually a color change from green to some other color such as red, orange, or yellow. The fruit becomes sweeter as organic acids or starch molecules are converted to sugar, which may reach a concentration of as much as 20%  in a ripe fruit.

By selectively breeding plants, humans have capitalized on the production of edible fruits. The apples, oranges, and other fruits in grocery stores are exaggerated versions of much smaller natural varieties of fleshy fruits. However, the staple foods for humans are the dry, wind-dispersed fruits of grasses, which are harvested while still on the parent plant. The cereal grains of wheat, rice, maize, and other grasses are easily mistaken for seeds, but each is actually a fruit with a dry pericarp that adheres tightly to the seed coats of the single seed within.




