
Chapter 1: INTRODUCTION: TEN THEMES IN THE STUDY OF LIFE

EXPLORING LIFE ON ITS MANY LEVELS

   Each level of biological organization has emergent properties

   Cells are an organism's basic units of structure and function

   The continuity of life is based on heritable information in the form of DNA

   Structure and function are correlated at all levels of biological organization

   Organisms are open systems that interact continuously with their environments

   Regulatory mechanisms ensure a dynamic balance in living systems



EVOLUTION, UNITY, AND DIVERSITY

   Diversity and unity are the dual faces of life on Earth

   Evolution is the core theme of biology



THE PROCESS OF SCIENCE

   Science is a process of inquiry that includes repeatable observations and testable hypotheses

   Science and technology are functions of society



REVIEW: USING THEMES TO CONNECT THE CONCEPTS OF BIOLOGY

   

Biology, the study of life, is rooted in the human spirit. People keep pets, nurture houseplants, invite avian visitors with backyard birdhouses, and visit zoos and nature preserves. Biology is the scientific extension of this human tendency to feel connected to and curious about all forms of life. It is a science for adventurous minds. It takes us, personally or vicariously, into jungles, deserts, seas, and other environments, where a variety of living forms and their physical surroundings are interwoven into complex webs called ecosystems. Studying life leads us into laboratories to examine more closely how living things, called organisms, work. Biology draws us into the microscopic world of the fundamental units of life known as cells and into the submicroscopic realm of the molecules that make up those cells. Our intellectual journey also takes us back in time, for biology encompasses not only contemporary life, but also a history of ancestral forms stretching nearly 4 billion years into the past. The scope of biology is immense. The purpose of this book is to introduce you to this multifaceted science.

You are becoming involved with biology during its most exciting era. The largest and best-equipped community of scientists in history is beginning to solve biological puzzles that once seemed unsolvable. We are moving ever closer to understanding how a single cell becomes a plant or animal; how the human mind works; how plants convert solar energy to the chemical energy of food; how organisms network in biological communities such as forests and coral reefs; and how the great diversity of life on Earth evolved from the first microbes.

Modern biology is as important as it is inspiring. Genetics and cell biology are revolutionizing medicine and agriculture. Molecular biology is providing new tools for anthropology, helping us trace the origin and dispersal of early humans. Ecology is helping us evaluate environmental issues, such as the causes and consequences of global warming. Neuroscience and evolutionary biology are reshaping psychology and sociology. These are just a few examples of how biology is weaving into the fabric of our culture as never before.

These are also the most challenging times to learn biology. The same discovery explosion that makes modern biology so exhilarating can also be intimidating, even to professional biologists. How, then, can beginning biology students hope to keep their heads above water in this deluge of data and discovery? The key is to recognize unifying themes that pervade all of biology--themes that will still apply decades from now, when much of the specific information presented in any textbook will be obsolete. This chapter introduces some broad, enduring themes in the study of life. The bulleted list on this page previews these ten themes.




