
 Biological clocks control circadian rhythms in plants and other eukaryotes

Many plant processes, such as transpiration and synthesis of certain enzymes, oscillate during the course of a day. Some of these cyclic variations are responses to the changes in light levels, temperature, and relative humidity that accompany the 24-hour cycle of day and night. However, one can eliminate these exogenous (external) factors by growing plants in growth chambers under rigidly maintained conditions of light, temperature, and humidity. Even under these artificially constant conditions, many physiological processes in plants, such as the opening and closing of stomata and the production of photosynthetic enzymes, continue to oscillate with a frequency of about 24 hours. For example, many legumes lower their leaves in the evening and raise them in the morning (FIGURE 39.21). A bean plant will continue these "sleep movements" even if kept in constant light or constant darkness; the leaves are not simply responding to sunrise and sunset. Such physiological cycles with a frequency of about 24-hours and that are not directly paced by any known environmental variable are called circadian rhythms (from the Latin circa, approximately, and dies, day). Circadian rhythms are a ubiquitous feature of eukaryotic life. For example, your pulse, blood pressure, temperature, rate of cell division, blood cell count, alertness, urine composition, metabolic rate, sex drive, and responsiveness to medications all fluctuate in a circadian manner.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 39-21. Sleep movements of a bean plant. Leaf position at noon (top) and at midnight. The movements are caused by reversible changes in the turgor pressure of cells on opposing sides of the pulvini, swollen regions of the petiole.

Are circadian rhythms truly prompted by an internal clock, or are they merely daily responses to some subtle but pervasive environmental cycle, such as geomagnetism or cosmic radiation? Organisms, including plants and humans, continue their rhythms when placed in the deepest mine shafts or when orbited in satellites, conditions that alter these subtle geophysical periodicities. All research thus far indicates that the oscillator for circadian rhythms is endogenous (internal). This internal clock, however, is entrained (set) to a period of precisely 24 hours by daily signals from the environment.

If an organism is kept in a constant environment, its circadian rhythms deviate from a 24-hour period (a "period" is the duration of one cycle). These free-running periods, as they are called, vary from about 21 to 27 hours, depending on the particular rhythmic response. The sleep movements of bean plants, for instance, have a period of 26 hours when the plants are kept under the free-running conditions of constant darkness. Deviation of the free-running period from exactly 24 hours does not mean that biological clocks drift erratically. Free-running clocks are still keeping perfect time, but they are not synchronized with the outside world.

How do biological clocks work? In attempting to answer this question, we must be careful to differentiate between the oscillator (clock) and the rhythmic processes it controls. The sweeping leaves of sleep movements are the "hands" of the biological clock, but these movements are not the essence of the clockwork itself. If the leaves of a bean plant are restrained for several hours so they cannot move, they will, on release, rush to the position appropriate for the time of day. We can interfere with a biological rhythm, but the clockwork goes right on ticking off the time.

Researchers are tracing the clock to a molecular mechanism that may be common to all eukaryotes. A leading hypothesis is that biological timekeeping may depend on synthesis of a protein that regulates its own production through feedback control. This protein may be a transcription factor that inhibits transcription of the gene that encodes for the transcription factor itself. The concentration of this transcription factor may accumulate during the first half of the circadian cycle, and then decline during the second half, due to self-inhibition of its own production.

Researchers have recently used a novel technique to identify clock mutants of Arabidopsis. One prominent circadian rhythm in plants is the daily production of certain photosynthesis-related proteins. Molecular biologists traced this rhythm to the promoter that regulates the transcription of the genes for these photosynthesis proteins. To identify clock mutants, scientists spliced the gene for an enzyme called luciferase to the promoter. Luciferase is the enzyme responsible for the bioluminescence of fireflies. When the biological clock turned on the promoter in the Arabidopsis genome, it also turned on the production of luciferase. The plants began to glow with a circadian periodicity. Clock mutants were then isolated by selecting specimens that glowed for a longer or shorter time than normal. The defective genes in some of these mutants affect proteins that normally bind photoreceptors. Perhaps these particular mutations disrupt a light-dependent mechanism that sets the biological clock.




