
 During DNA replication, base pairing enables existing DNA strands to serve as templates for new complementary strands

In a second paper that followed their announcement of the double helix, Watson and Crick stated their hypothesis for how DNA replicates:

Now our model for deoxyribonucleic acid is, in effect, a pair of templates, each of which is complementary to the other. We imagine that prior to duplication the hydrogen bonds are broken, and the two chains unwind and separate. Each chain then acts as a template for the formation onto itself of a new companion chain, so that eventually we shall have two pairs of chains, where we only had one before. Moreover, the sequence of the pairs of bases will have been duplicated exactly.*

FIGURE 16.7 illustrates Watson and Crick's basic idea. To make it easier to follow, the diagram shows only a short section of double helix, in untwisted form. Notice that if you cover one of the two DNA strands of FIGURE 16.7a, you can still determine its linear sequence of bases by referring to the unmasked strand and applying the base-pairing rules. The two strands are complementary; each stores the information necessary to reconstruct the other. When a cell copies a DNA molecule, each strand serves as a template (mold) for ordering nucleotides into a new complementary strand. One at a time, nucleotides line up along the template strand according to the base-pairing rules. The nucleotides are linked to form the new strands. Where there was one double-stranded DNA molecule at the beginning of the process, there are now two, each an exact replica of the "parent" molecule. The copying mechanism is analogous to using a photographic negative to make a positive image, which can in turn be used to make another negative, and so on. (See FIGURE 5.30 for a helical version of FIGURE 16.7.)



Click image to enlarge



Fig 16-7. A model for DNA replication: the basic concept. In this simplification, a short segment of DNA has been untwisted into a structure that resembles a ladder. The rails of the ladder are the sugar-phosphate backbones of the two DNA strands; the rungs are the pairs of nitrogenous bases. Simple shapes symbolize the four kinds of bases. Dark blue represents DNA strands originally present in the parent cell; light blue represents newly synthesized DNA.

This model of gene replication remained untested for several years following publication of the DNA structure. The requisite experiments were simple in concept but difficult to perform. Watson and Crick's model predicts that when a double helix replicates, each of the two daughter molecules will have one old strand, derived from the parent molecule, and one newly made strand. This semiconservative model can be distinguished from a conservative model of replication, in which the parent molecule somehow emerges from the replication process intact (that is, it is conserved). In yet a third model, called the dispersive model, all four strands of DNA following replication have a mixture of old and new DNA (FIGURE 16.8, p. 294). Although mechanisms for conservative or dispersive DNA replication are not easy to devise, these models remained possibilities until they could be ruled out. Finally, in the late 1950s, Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl devised experiments that tested the three hypotheses. Their experiments supported the semiconservative model, as predicted by Watson and Crick (FIGURE 16.9, p. 294).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 16-8. Three alternative models of DNA replication. The short segments of double helix here symbolize the DNA within a cell. Beginning with a parent cell, we follow the DNA for two generations of cells--two rounds of DNA replication. Newly made DNA is lighter blue.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 16-9. The Meselson-Stahl experiment tested three models of DNA replication. Meselson and Stahl cultured E. coli bacteria for several generations on a medium containing a heavy isotope of nitrogen, 15N. The bacteria incorporated the heavy nitrogen into their nucleotides and then into their DNA. The scientists then transferred the bacteria to a medium containing 14N, the lighter, more common isotope of nitrogen. Any new DNA that the bacteria synthesized would be lighter than the "old" DNA made in the 15N medium. Meselson and Stahl could distinguish DNA of different densities by centrifuging DNA extracted from the bacteria. The centrifuge tubes in this drawing represent the results predicted by each of the three models in FIGURE 16.8. The first replication in the 14N medium produced a band of hybrid (15N-14N) DNA. This result eliminated the conservative model. A second replication produced both light and hybrid DNA, a result that eliminated the dispersive model and supported the semiconservative model.

The basic principle of DNA replication is elegantly simple. However, the actual process involves complex biochemical gymnastics, as we will now see.




