
 Plants and other autotrophs are the producers of the biosphere

Photosynthesis nourishes almost all of the living world directly or indirectly. An organism acquires the organic compounds it uses for energy and carbon skeletons by one of two major modes: autotrophic or heterotrophic nutrition. At first, the term autotrophic (from the Greek autos, self, and trophos, feed) may seem to contradict the principle that organisms are open systems, taking in resources from their environment. Autotrophs are not totally self-sufficient, however; they are self-feeders only in the sense that they sustain themselves without eating other organisms or substances derived from other organisms. Autotrophs produce their organic molecules from CO2 and other inorganic raw materials obtained from the environment and are the ultimate sources of organic compounds for all nonautotrophic organisms. For this reason, biologists refer to autotrophs as the producers of the biosphere (the global ecosystem).

Plants are autotrophs; the only nutrients they require are carbon dioxide from the air, and water and minerals from the soil. Specifically, plants are photoautotrophs, organisms that use light as a source of energy to synthesize organic substances. Photosynthesis also occurs in algae, including certain protists, and in some prokaryotes (FIGURE 10.1). In this chapter, our emphasis will be on plants. Variations in photosynthesis that occur in algae and bacteria will be discussed in Unit Five. A much rarer form of self-feeding is unique to those bacteria that are chemoautotrophs. These organisms produce their organic compounds without the help of light, obtaining their energy by oxidizing inorganic substances, such as sulfur or ammonia. (We will postpone further discussion of this type of autotrophic nutrition until Chapter 27.)



Click image to enlarge



Fig 10-1. Photoautotrophs. These organisms use light energy to drive the synthesis of organic molecules from carbon dioxide and (in most cases) water. They feed not only themselves, but the entire living world. (a) On land, plants are the predominant producers of food. Three major groups of land plants--mosses, ferns, and flowering plants--are represented in this scene. In oceans, ponds, lakes, and other aquatic environments, photosynthetic organisms include (b) multicellular algae, such as this kelp; (c) some unicellular protists, such as Euglena;(d) the prokaryotes called cyanobacteria; and (e) other photosynthetic prokaryotes, such as these purple sulfur bacteria (c, d, e: LMs).

Heterotrophs obtain their organic material by the second major mode of nutrition. Unable to make their own food, they live on compounds produced by other organisms; heterotrophs are the biosphere's consumers. The most obvious form of this "other-feeding" (hetero means "other, different") occurs when an animal eats plants or other animals. But heterotrophic nutrition may be more subtle. Some heterotrophs consume the remains of dead organisms, decomposing and feeding on organic litter such as carcasses, feces, and fallen leaves; they are known as decomposers. Most fungi and many types of bacteria get their nourishment this way. Almost all heterotrophs, including humans, are completely dependent on photoautotrophs for food, and also for oxygen, a by-product of photosynthesis. Thus, we can trace the food we eat and the oxygen we breathe to the chloroplast.




