
 Nerve impulses propagate themselves along an axon

For an action potential to function as a long-distance signal, it must somehow "travel" along the axon to the far end of the cell. The action potential does not actually travel but is regenerated repeatedly along the axon. The regeneration mechanism is the same as for graded depolarization: Na+ entering the cell creates an electrical current that depolarizes the next neighboring region of the membrane. In the case of an action potential, however, the Na+ influx is extensive enough to assure that the neighboring region will be depolarized above threshold, triggering a new action potential at that position (FIGURE 48.10, p. 1032). Thus, the effect of an action potential is like tipping the first of a row of standing dominoes. Just as the first domino's fall is relayed to the end of the row, the first action potential generates an action potential in the next part of the membrane, and so on to the end of the axon.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-10. Propagation of the action potential. The three parts of this figure show the changes that occur in a portion of an axon at three successive times as a nerve signal passes from left to right. At each point along the axon, the voltage-gated channels go through the sequence described in FIGURE 48.9, reproducing the sequence of voltage changes associated with the action potential. (The "status" of the membrane is color-coded to FIGURE 48.9.)

What prevents Na+ entry from reexciting the region behind the action potential, which would cause the impulse to spread back along the axon toward the cell body as well as in the normal direction of propagation? Recall that an action potential is followed by a refractory period, when inactivation gates of sodium channels are closed and an action potential cannot be triggered. A wave of depolarization passing a point along the axon cannot induce another action potential behind it, but only in the forward direction. Thus, the axon is normally a one-way avenue for the conduction of nerve impulses.

Several factors affect the speed at which action potentials propagate along an axon. One factor is the diameter of the axon: The larger the axon's diameter, the faster the speed of transmission. This is because resistance to the flow of electrical current is inversely proportional to the cross-sectional area of the "wire" that conducts the current. In a thick axon, the depolarization associated with an action potential at a particular location can effectively reach farther along the interior of the axon and set up a new action potential at a greater distance away than in a thin axon. Transmission speed varies from several centimeters per second in very thin axons to about 100 m/sec in the giant axons of certain invertebrates, including squid and lobsters. These giant axons function in behavioral responses requiring great speed, such as the backward tail-flip that enables a threatened lobster or crayfish to escape.

A different means of speeding the propagation of action potentials has evolved in vertebrates. Recall that many axons in vertebrate nervous systems are myelinated, coated with insulating layers of membranes deposited by oligodendrocytes or Schwann cells (see FIGURE 48.5). The voltage-gated ion channels that produce the action potential are concentrated in the nodes of Ranvier, small gaps between successive Schwann cells along the axon. Also, extracellular fluid is in contact with the axon membrane only at the nodes, so that the flow of ions between the inside and outside of the axon can occur only in these regions. For these reasons, the action potential does not propagate itself in the regions between the nodes. Rather, the Na+ current generated by the action potential at a node travels all the way to the next node, where it stimulates depolarization and a new action potential (FIGURE 48.11). This mechanism is called saltatory conduction (from the Latin saltare, to leap) because the action potential appears to "jump" along the axon from node to node. Saltatory conduction can transmit impulses at speeds up to 150 m/sec in myelinated neurons.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-11. Saltatory conduction. In a myelinated axon, the ion current during an action potential at one node of Ranvier spreads along the interior of the axon to the next node (blue arrows), triggering an action potential there. The action potential thus jumps from node to node as it propagates along the axon (red arrows).

We have seen how stimulating the dendrite of a neuron can produce an action potential in the axon that is propagated to the very tip of the cell. Our next step is to find out how the impulse is transmitted from a neuron to another neuron or an effector (muscle or gland cell).




