
Chapter 48: NERVOUS SYSTEMS

AN OVERVIEW OF NERVOUS SYSTEMS

   Nervous systems perform the three overlapping functions of sensory input, integration, and motor output

   Networks of neurons with intricate connections form nervous systems



THE NATURE OF NERVE SIGNALS

   Every cell has a voltage, or membrane potential, across its plasma membrane

   Changes in the membrane potential of a neuron give rise to nerve impulses

   Nerve impulses propagate themselves along an axon

   Chemical or electrical communication between cells occurs at synapses

   Neural integration occurs at the cellular level

   The same neurotransmitter can produce different effects on different types of cells



EVOLUTION AND DIVERSITY OF NERVOUS SYSTEMS

   The ability of cells to respond to the environment has evolved over billions of years

   Nervous systems show diverse patterns of organization



VERTEBRATE NERVOUS SYSTEMS

   Vertebrate nervous systems have central and peripheral components

   The divisions of the peripheral nervous system interact in maintaining homeostasis

   Embryonic development of the vertebrate brain reflects its evolution from three anterior bulges of the neural tube

   Evolutionarily older structures of the vertebrate brain regulate essential automatic and integrative functions

   The cerebrum is the most highly evolved structure of the mammalian brain

   Regions of the cerebrum are specialized for different functions

   Research on neuron development and neural stem cells may lead to new approaches for treating CNS injuries and diseases

The scanning electron micrograph on this page shows an unusual juxtaposition of the basic components of animal nervous systems and computers--a single nerve cell (a neuron) on the surface of a microprocessor. Your own nervous system, made of living neurons, is using processes vastly more complex than those of a computer as you read and comprehend these words. Indeed, the human nervous system is probably the most intricately organized aggregate of matter on Earth. A single cubic centimeter of the human brain may contain well over 50 million nerve cells, each of which may communicate with thousands of other neurons in information-processing networks that make the most elaborate computer look primitive. These neural pathways control our every feeling, perception, and movement and enable us to learn, remember, think, and be conscious of ourselves and our surroundings.

The nervous system, endocrine system, and immune system often cooperate and interact in regulating internal body functions and behavior (see Chapters 43 and 45). In the maintenance of homeostasis, certain parts of the brain receive and process data about the body's internal environment and correct imbalances by sending out commands to other organs. Neural and endocrine pathways can also collaborate during responses to stress--enhancing or suppressing immune function, for example.

Despite their structural and functional linkage, the nervous system and endocrine system play somewhat different roles in body coordination. With its incomparable structural complexity, the nervous system can integrate vast amounts of information, such as that required for human thought and speech. Timing can also be a key difference. The endocrine system may take minutes, hours, or even days to act, partly because of the time it takes for hormones to be made and carried in the blood to their target organs. In contrast, the nervous system is a signaling network with branches carrying information directly to and from specific sites. Neurons are specialized for the fast transmission of impulses--as quickly as 150 m/sec (over 330 mph). In humans, information can travel from the brain to the hands (or vice versa) in a few milliseconds.

Animal survival and reproduction depends on rapid and flexible responses to changes in the environment, and a diversity of nervous systems has evolved in various animal phyla. This chapter discusses the form and function of these nervous systems. As we have seen in many other organ systems, animal nervous systems are remarkably similar at the cellular level--in how neurons work, for example--but differ at higher levels of organization, such as the structure and function of their brains.




