
 Temperature and water are the major climatic factors determining the distribution of organisms

Four abiotic factors--temperature, water, light, and wind--are the major components of climate, the prevailing weather conditions at a locality. Temperature and water are especially important as factors determining the geographic range of organisms.

Climate and Biomes

We can see the great impact of climate on the distribution of organisms by constructing a climograph, a plot of the temperature and rainfall in a particular region. For example, FIGURE 50.10 shows a climograph denoting annual mean temperature and precipitation for some of the biomes of North America. Biomes are major types of ecosystems, those that occupy broad geographic regions. Examples of biomes are coniferous forests, deserts, and grasslands. Notice in FIGURE 50.10 that the range of rainfall occurring in northern coniferous forests is similar to that of temperate forests, but the temperature ranges are different. Grasslands are generally drier than either kind of forest, and deserts are drier still.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 50-10. A climograph for some major kinds of ecosystems (biomes) in North America. The areas plotted here encompass the range of annual mean temperature and precipitation occurring in the biomes.

Annual means for temperature and rainfall are reasonably well correlated with the biomes we find in different regions. However, we must always be careful to distinguish correlation from causation, a cause-and-effect relationship. Although our climograph provides circumstantial evidence that temperature and rainfall are important to the distribution of biomes, it does not prove that these variables govern their geographic location. Only a detailed analysis of the water and temperature tolerances of individual species could establish the controlling effects of these variables.

We can also see in our climograph that factors other than mean temperature and precipitation must play a role in determining which biomes are found where, because there are regions where biomes overlap. For example, certain areas in North America with a particular temperature and precipitation combination support a temperate forest, but other areas with the same values for these variables support a coniferous forest; still others support a grassland. How do we explain this variation? First, remember that the climograph is based on annual averages. Often it is not only the mean or average climate that is important but also the pattern of climatic variation. For example, some areas may get regular precipitation throughout the year, whereas others with the same annual amount of precipitation have distinct wet and dry seasons. A similar phenomenon may occur with respect to temperature. Other factors, such as the bedrock in an area, may greatly affect mineral nutrient availability and soil structure, which in turn affect the kind of vegetation that will develop.

With these complex considerations in mind, let's take a closer look at how climate affects the geographic distribution of organisms.

Global Climate Patterns

Earth's global climate patterns are largely determined by the input of solar energy and the planet's movement in space. The sun's warming effect on the atmosphere, land, and water establishes the temperature variations, cycles of air movement, and evaporation of water that are responsible for dramatic latitudinal variations in climate. Because solar radiation is most intense when the sun is directly overhead, the shape of the Earth causes latitudinal variation in the intensity of sunlight (FIGURE 50.11). However, the planet is also tilted on its axis by 23.5&#176; relative to its plane of orbit around the sun, and this tilt causes seasonal variation in the intensity of solar radiation (FIGURE 50.12). The tropics (those regions that lie between 23.5&#176; north latitude and 23.5&#176; south latitude) experience the greatest annual input and the least seasonal variation in solar radiation of any region on Earth. The seasonality of light and temperature increases steadily toward the poles; polar regions have long, cold winters with periods of continual darkness and short summers with periods of continual light.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 50-11. Solar radiation and latitude. Because sunlight strikes the equator perpendicularly, more heat and light are delivered there per unit of surface area than at higher northern and southern latitudes, where sunlight has a longer path through the atmosphere and strikes the curved surface of Earth at an oblique angle.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 50-12. What causes the seasons? The permanent tilt of the Earth on its axis causes seasonal variation in temperature and light intensity as the planet revolves around the sun.

Intense solar radiation near the equator initiates a global circulation of air, creating precipitation and winds (FIGURE 50.13). High temperatures in the tropics evaporate water from Earth's surface and cause warm, wet air masses to rise and flow toward the poles. The rising air masses release much of their water content, creating abundant precipitation in tropical regions. Thus, high temperatures, intense sunshine, and ample rainfall are all characteristic of a tropical climate, fostering the growth of lush vegetation in some tropical forests and the development of coral reefs. The high-altitude air masses, now dry, descend toward Earth at latitudes around 30&#176; north and south, absorbing moisture from the land and creating an arid climate conducive to the development of the deserts that are common at these latitudes. Some of the descending air then flows toward the poles at low altitude, depositing abundant precipitation (though less than in the tropics) where the air masses again rise and release moisture in the vicinity of 60&#176; latitude. Broad expanses of coniferous forest dominate the landscape at these fairly wet but generally cool latitudes. Some of the cold, dry rising air then flows to the poles, where it descends and flows back toward the equator, absorbing moisture and creating the comparatively rainless and bitterly cold climates of the Arctic and Antarctica.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 50-13. Global air circulation, precipitation, and winds.

Local and Seasonal Effects on Climate

Proximity to bodies of water and topographic features such as mountain ranges create a climatic patchiness on a regional scale, and smaller features of the landscape contribute to local climatic variation. These regional and local variations in climate create a number of ecosystems that are less widely spread than the major biomes.

Ocean currents influence climate along the coasts of continents by heating or cooling overlying air masses, which may then pass across the land. Evaporation from the ocean is also greater than it is over land, and coastal regions are generally moister than inland areas at the same latitude. The cool, misty climate produced by the cold California current that flows southward along the western United States supports a rain forest ecosystem dominated by large coniferous trees in the Pacific Northwest and large redwood groves farther south. Similarly, the warm Gulf Stream flowing north out of the Gulf of Mexico and across the North Atlantic tempers the climate on the west coast of the British Isles, making it warmer during winter than the coast of New England, which is actually farther south but is cooled by a current flowing south from the coast of Greenland.

As every vacationer knows, oceans (and large inland bodies of water) generally moderate the climate of nearby terrestrial environments. During a warm summer day, when the land is hotter than a large lake or the ocean, air over the land heats and rises, drawing a cool breeze from the water across the land. At night, by contrast, air over the warmer ocean or lake rises, establishing a circulation that draws cooler air from the land out over the water, replacing it with warmer air from offshore. Proximity to water does not always moderate climate, however. Several regions (including the coast of central and southern California) have a Mediterranean-like climate; in summer, cool, dry ocean breezes are warmed when they contact the land, absorbing moisture and creating hot, rainless summers just a few miles inland.

Mountains also have a significant effect on solar radiation, local temperature, and rainfall. South-facing slopes in the Northern Hemisphere receive more sunlight than nearby north-facing slopes and are therefore warmer and drier. In many of the mountains of western North America, spruce and other conifers occupy the north-facing slopes, whereas shrubby, drought-resistant vegetation inhabits many south-facing slopes. In addition, at any particular latitude, air temperature declines approximately 6&#176;C with every 1,000-m increase in elevation, paralleling the decline of temperature with increasing latitude. In the north temperate zone, for example, a 1,000-m increase in elevation produces a temperature change equivalent to that over an 880-km increase in latitude. This is one reason mountain communities are similar to those at lower elevation farther from the equator.

When warm, moist air approaches a mountain, it rises and cools, releasing moisture on the windward side of the range. On the leeward side of the mountain, cooler, dry air descends, absorbing moisture and producing a rain shadow (FIGURE 50.14). Deserts commonly occur on the leeward side of mountain ranges, a phenomenon evident in the Great Basin and Mojave Desert of western North America, the Gobi Desert of Asia, and in the small deserts that characterize the southwest corners of some Caribbean islands.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 50-14. How mountains affect rainfall. This drawing represents major landforms across the state of Washington. As moist air moves in off the Pacific Ocean and encounters the westernmost mountains (the Coast Range), it flows upward, cools at higher altitudes, and drops a large amount of water. Some of the world's tallest trees, the Douglas firs, thrive here. Farther inland, precipitation increases again as the air moves up and over higher mountains (the Cascade Range). On the eastern side of the Cascades, there is little precipitation. As a result of this rain shadow, much of central Washington is very arid, almost qualifying as desert.

Seasonality generates local environmental variation in addition to the global changes in day length, solar radiation, and temperature described earlier. Because of the changing angle of the sun over the course of the year, the belts of wet and dry air on either side of the equator undergo slight seasonal shifts in latitude that produce marked wet and dry seasons around 20&#176; latitude, where tropical deciduous forests grow. In addition, seasonal changes in wind patterns produce variations in ocean currents, sometimes causing the upwelling of nutrientrich, cold water from deep ocean layers, thus nourishing organisms that live near the surface.

Ponds and lakes are also sensitive to seasonal temperature changes (FIGURE 50.15). During the summer and winter, many lakes in temperate regions are thermally stratified--that is, layered vertically according to temperature. Such lakes undergo a biannual mixing of their waters as a result of changing water temperature profiles. This turnover, as it is called, brings oxygenated water from the surface of lakes to the bottom and nutrient-rich water from the bottom to the surface in both spring and autumn (see FIGURE 50.15). These cyclic changes in the abiotic properties of lakes are essential for the survival and growth of organisms at all levels within this ecosystem.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 50-15. Lake stratification and seasonal turnover. Lakes in temperate zones tend to stratify by temperature and density in winter and summer. The biannual mixing of lake waters occurs because water is most dense at 4&#176;C, and water at that temperature sinks below water that is either warmer or colder.

Microclimate

Climate also varies on a very fine scale, called microclimate. For example, ecologists often refer to the microclimate on a forest floor or under a rock. Many features in the environment influence microclimates by casting shade, affecting evaporation from soil, and changing the patterns of wind. Forest trees frequently moderate the microclimate below. Cleared areas generally experience greater temperature extremes than the forest interior because of greater solar radiation and wind currents that are established by the rapid heating and cooling of open land; evaporation is generally greater in clearings as well. Low-lying ground is usually wetter than high ground and tends to be occupied by different species of trees within the same forest. If you have ever lifted a log or large stone in the woods, you are well aware that there are organisms (such as salamanders, worms, and insects) that live in the shelter of this microenvironment, buffered from the extremes of temperature and moisture. Every environment on Earth is similarly characterized by a mosaic of small-scale differences in the abiotic factors that influence the local distributions of organisms.

Long-Term Climate Change

If temperature and moisture are the master limiting factors for the geographic ranges of plants and animals, the climatic warming that is under way during the 21st century will have profound effects on the biosphere. (The causes and consequences of global warming are discussed in detail in Chapter 54.) One way to get a glimpse of the kinds of changes that may occur is to look back at the changes that have occurred in temperate regions since the end of the last ice age.

The last continental glaciers began retreating in North America and Eurasia about 16,000 years ago. The northward expansion of tree distributions lagged behind the retreat of the ice. A detailed record of these migrations is captured in fossil pollen deposited in lakes and ponds. (It may seem odd to think of trees "migrating," but recall from Chapter 38 that wind and animals can disperse seeds, sometimes over great distances.) In North America, oaks and maples moved rapidly in a northeastward direction from the Mississippi Valley, while hickories advanced more slowly. Hemlocks and white pines moved northwestward from refuges along the Atlantic coast. The important conclusion from this research is that various tree species advanced their range at different rates. If you were sitting in New Hampshire and lived a very long time, you would have seen sugar maple trees arrive 9,000 years ago, hemlock 7,500 years ago, and beech trees 6,500 years ago.

If we can determine the climatic limits of current geographic distributions for organisms, we can make predictions about how distributions will change with climatic warming. A major question when applying this approach to plants is whether seed dispersal is rapid enough to sustain the migration of each species as climate changes. For example, fossils suggest that eastern hemlock was delayed nearly 2,500 years in its movement north at the end of the Ice Age partly because of relatively slow seed dispersal.

Let's look at a specific case of how the fossil record of past tree migrations can inform predictions about the biological impact of the current global warming trend. FIGURE 50.16 shows the current and potential geographic range of the American beech (Fagus grandifolia) under two climate-change models. These models predict that the potential northern limit of the beech's range will move 700-900 km north in the next century, and the southern range limit will shrink to the north as well. If left to natural processes, the beech must move 7-9 km per year to the north to keep pace with the warming climate. By contrast, since the end of the Ice Age, the beech migrated into its present range at a rate of only 0.2 km per year. If these predictions are even approximately correct, migrating species such as beech trees will require human assistance to move into new ranges where they can survive as the climate warms. If this does not occur, beech and many other species may become extinct.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 50-16. Current geographic range and predicted future range for the American beech (Fagus grandifolia) under two climate-change scenarios.




