
 ATP powers cellular work by coupling exergonic reactions to endergonic reactions

A cell does three main kinds of work:

Mechanical work, such as the beating of cilia, the contraction of muscle cells, and the movement of chromosomes during cellular reproduction

Transport work, the pumping of substances across membranes against the direction of spontaneous movement

Chemical work, the pushing of endergonic reactions that would not occur spontaneously, such as the synthesis of polymers from monomers

In most cases, the immediate source of energy that powers cellular work is ATP.

The Structure and Hydrolysis of ATP

ATP (adenosine triphosphate) is closely related to one type of nucleotide found in nucleic acids. ATP has the nitrogenous base adenine bonded to ribose, as in an adenine nucleotide of RNA. In RNA, however, only one phosphate group is attached to the ribose (see FIGURE 5.29b), whereas adenosine triphosphate has a chain of three phosphate groups attached to the ribose (FIGURE 6.8a).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 6-8. The structure and hydrolysis of ATP. The hydrolysis of ATP yields inorganic phosphate and ADP. In the cell, most hydroxyl groups of phosphates are ionized (--O-).

The bonds between the phosphate groups of ATP's tail can be broken by hydrolysis. When the terminal phosphate bond is broken, a molecule of inorganic phosphate (abbreviated 



 throughout this book) leaves the ATP, which becomes adenosine diphosphate, or ADP (FIGURE 6.8b). The reaction is exergonic and under laboratory conditions releases 7.3 kcal of energy per mole of ATP hydrolyzed: 

This is the free-energy change measured under what are called standard conditions. However, the chemical and physical conditions in the cell do not conform to standard conditions. When the reaction occurs in the cellular environment rather than in a test tube, the actual DG is about - 13 kcal/mol, 78%  greater than the energy released by ATP hydrolysis under standard conditions.

Because their hydrolysis releases energy, the phosphate bonds of ATP are sometimes referred to as high-energy phosphate bonds, but the term is misleading. The phosphate bonds of ATP are not unusually strong bonds, as "high-energy" may imply. In fact, compared to most bonds in organic molecules, these bonds are relatively weak, and it is because they are somewhat unstable that their hydrolysis yields energy. The products of hydrolysis (ADP and 



) are more stable than ATP. When a system changes in the direction of greater stability--when a compressed spring relaxes, for instance--the change is exergonic. Thus, the release of energy during the hydrolysis of ATP comes from the chemical change to a more stable condition, not from the phosphate bonds themselves.

Why are the phosphate bonds so fragile? If we reexamine the ATP molecule in FIGURE 6.8a, we can see that all three phosphate groups are negatively charged. These like charges are crowded together, and their repulsion contributes to the instability of this region of the ATP molecule. The triphosphate tail of ATP is the chemical equivalent of a loaded spring.

How ATP Performs Work

When ATP is hydrolyzed in a test tube, the release of free energy merely heats the surrounding water. In the cell, that would be an inefficient and dangerous use of a valuable energy resource. With the help of specific enzymes, the cell is able to couple the energy of ATP hydrolysis directly to endergonic processes by transferring a phosphate group from ATP to some other molecule. The recipient of the phosphate group is then said to be phosphorylated. The key to the coupling of exergonic and endergonic reactions is the formation of this phosphorylated intermediate, which is more reactive (less stable) than the original molecule. FIGURE 6.9 shows a cellular process that exemplifies this mechanism: the synthesis of the amino acid glutamine from glutamic acid (another amino acid) and ammonia.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 6-9. Energy coupling by phosphate transfer. In this example, ATP hydrolysis drives the conversion of the amino acid glutamic acid (Glu) to another amino acid, glutamine (Glu--NH2).

Nearly all cellular work depends on ATP's energizing of other molecules by transferring phosphate groups. For instance, when ATP powers the movement of muscles, it transfers phosphate groups to contractile proteins.

The Regeneration of ATP

An organism at work uses ATP continuously, but ATP is a renewable resource that can be regenerated by the addition of phosphate to ADP (FIGURE 6.10). The free energy required to phosphorylate ADP comes from breakdown reactions (catabolism) in the cell. This shuttling of inorganic phosphate and energy is called the ATP cycle, and it couples the cell's energy-yielding processes to the energy-producing ones. The ATP cycle moves at an astonishing pace. For example, a working muscle cell recycles its entire pool of ATP about once each minute. That turnover represents 10 million molecules of ATP consumed and regenerated per second per cell. If ATP could not be regenerated by the phosphorylation of ADP, humans would consume nearly their body weight in ATP each day.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 6-10. The ATP cycle. Energy released by breakdown reactions (catabolism) in the cell is used to phosphorylate ADP, regenerating ATP. Energy stored in ATP drives most cellular work. Thus, ATP couples the cell's energy-yielding processes to the energy-consuming ones.

Because a reversible process cannot go downhill both ways, the regeneration of ATP from ADP is necessarily endergonic:  Catabolic (exergonic) pathways, especially cellular respiration, provide the energy for the endergonic process of making ATP. Plants also use light energy to produce ATP.

Thus, the ATP cycle is a turnstile through which energy passes during its transfer from catabolic to anabolic pathways. In fact, the energy temporarily stored in ATP drives most cellular work.




