
 Conservation biologists face many challenges in setting up protected areas

Conservation biologists are applying current ecological research in setting up reserves or protected areas to slow the loss of biodiversity. National parks are examples of such protected places. In choosing locations for protection and designing nature reserves, conservation biologists face many challenges. If a community is subject to fire, grazing, and predation, for example, should the reserve be managed to minimize the risks of these processes to endangered or threatened species? Or should the reserve be left as natural as possible, with such processes as fires ignited by lightning allowed to play out without any human intervention? This is just one of the debates that arise among people who share an interest in the health of national parks and other protected areas.

Governments have set aside about 7%  of the world's land in various forms of reserves. How are these protected locations selected? Much of the focus has been on hot spots of biological diversity. A biodiversity hot spot is a relatively small area with an exceptional concentration of endemic species and a large number of endangered and threatened species. For example, nearly 30%  of all bird species are confined to only about 2%  of Earth's land area. And about 50,000 plant species, or 20%  of all known plant species, inhabit just 18 hot spots making up a total of only 0.5%  of the global land surface. Overall, the "hottest" of the biodiversity hot spots, including rain forests and dry shrublands (such as California's chaparral), total less than 1.5%  of Earth's land but are home to a third of all species of plants and vertebrates (FIGURE 55.17). Conservation biologists have also identified aquatic ecosystems, including certain river systems and coral reefs, as biodiversity hot spots.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 55-17. Some biodiversity hot spots. Only dry shrubland (such as chaparral) and tropical forest hot spots are mapped here.

Biodiversity hot spots are obviously good choices for nature reserves. However, recognizing hot spots is not always straightforward. And even if all hot spots could be protected, that effort would fall woefully short of conserving the planet's biodiversity. One problem is that a hot spot for one taxonomic group, such as birds, may not be a hot spot for some other taxonomic group, such as butterflies. Designating an area as a biodiversity hot spot is often taxonomically biased toward saving vertebrates and plants, with less attention paid to invertebrates and microorganisms. Some biologists are also concerned that the hot-spot strategy focuses so much of the conservation effort on such a small fraction of Earth's land.

As conservation biologists learn more about the requirements for achieving minimum viable population sizes for endangered species, it is becoming clear that most national parks and other reserves are far too small. For example, FIGURE 55.18 compares the boundaries of Yellowstone and Grand Teton National Parks with the actual area required to prevent extinction of grizzly bears. The biotic boundary, the area needed to sustain the grizzly, is more than ten times as large as the legal boundary, the actual area of the parks. Given political and economic realities, it is unlikely that many existing parks will be enlarged, and most new reserves will also be too small. Areas of private and public land surrounding reserves will have to contribute to the conservation of biodiversity. In particular, this means integrating how land is used for agriculture and forestry into conservation strategies.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 55-18. The legal and biotic boundaries for grizzly bears in Yellowstone and Grand Teton National Parks.




