
 Sociobiology places social behavior in an evolutionary context

Social behavior, broadly defined, is any kind of interaction between two or more animals, usually of the same species. Although most sexually reproducing species must be social for part of their life cycle in order to reproduce, some species spend most of their lives in close association with conspecifics. Social interactions have long been a research focus for scientists who study behavior. The complexity of behavior increases dramatically when interactions among individuals are considered. Aggression, courtship, cooperation, and even deception are part of the range of social behavior.

Social behavior raises particularly interesting questions about evolutionary adaptation. In morphology and physiology, it is often obvious how some feature of an organism is beneficial. Wings, for instance, are adaptations for flight. But with social behavior, the answers are sometimes less intuitive. As we will see, males and females in some species may have long, complicated courtship periods, which raises the question of why mating could not be done more simply. And some animals behave altruistically (unselfishly), in ways that appear to reduce the number of offspring they produce. Thus, social behavior can appear inefficient or even counterproductive to reproductive success. Nevertheless, extensive research is beginning to reveal how these behaviors are adaptive and how they could have evolved by natural selection.

The discipline of sociobiology applies evolutionary theory to the study and interpretation of social behavior. Much of the evolutionary theory underlying the modern study of social behavior was conceived by the late British biologist William Hamilton, who considered how natural selection acts on the social behavior of individuals. The evolutionary emphasis of Hamilton's work underlies sociobiology and the more general field of behavioral ecology as it is practiced today. The development of sociobiology into a coherent method of analysis and interpretation was further catalyzed in 1975 with the publication of E. O. Wilson's watershed book Sociobiology: The New Synthesis.




