
 Cell biologists can isolate organelles to study their functions

The goal of cell fractionation is to take cells apart, separating the major organelles so that their functions can be studied (FIGURE 7.3). The instrument used to fractionate cells is the centrifuge, a merry-go-round for test tubes that can spin at various speeds. The most powerful machines, called ultracentrifuges, can spin as fast as 130,000 revolutions per minute (rpm) and apply forces on particles of more than 1 million times the force of gravity (1,000,000 g).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 7-3. Cell fractionation. Disrupted cells are centrifuged at various speeds and durations to isolate (fractionate) components of different sizes. By determining which cell fractions are associated with particular metabolic processes, researchers can tie those functions to certain organelles.

Fractionation begins with homogenization, the disruption of cells. The objective is to break the cells apart without damaging their organelles. Spinning the soupy homogenate in a centrifuge at low speed separates the parts of the cell into two fractions: the pellet, consisting of the larger, heavier structures that become packed at the bottom of the test tube; and the supernatant, consisting of the smaller, lighter parts of the cell suspended in the liquid above the pellet. The supernatant is decanted into another tube and centrifuged again at a higher speed. The process is repeated, increasing the speed with each step, collecting smaller and smaller components of the homogenized cells in successive pellets.

Cell fractionation enables the researcher to prepare specific components of cells in bulk quantity in order to study their composition and functions. By following this approach, biologists have been able to assign various functions of the cell to the different organelles, a task that would be far more difficult with intact cells. For example, one cellular fraction collected by centrifugation has enzymes that function in the metabolic process known as cellular respiration. The electron microscope reveals this fraction to be very rich in the organelles called mitochondria. This evidence helped cell biologists determine that mitochondria are the sites of cellular respiration. Cytology and biochemistry complement each other in correlating cellular structure and function.




