
 Phylum Zygomycota: Zygote fungi form resistant structures during sexual reproduction





Mycologists have described about 600 zygomycetes, or zygote fungi. (The suffix -mycete, which occurs many times in this chapter, means "fungus.") These fungi are mostly terrestrial and live in soil or on decaying plant and animal material. One group of major importance forms mycorrhizae, mutualistic associations with the roots of plants (see FIGURE 31.18). Zygomycete hyphae are coenocytic, with septa found only where reproductive cells are formed.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 31-18. Mycorrhizae. Mutualistic associations between fungi and roots, mycorrhizae enhance the absorption of minerals. This scanning electron micrograph of fungal hyphae on a small root of a eucalyptus reveals the intimate association between the symbiotic partners of mycorrhizae. Some mycorrhizal fungi surround the living cells of the root, while others actually penetrate the root cells.

A common zygomycete is black bread mold, Rhizopus stolonifer, still an occasional household pest despite the addition of preservatives to most processed foods (FIGURE 31.6). Horizontal hyphae spread out over the food, penetrate it, and absorb nutrients. In the asexual phase, bulbous black sporangia develop at the tips of upright hyphae. Within each sporangium, hundreds of haploid spores develop and are dispersed through the air. Spores that happen to land on moist food germinate, growing into new mycelia. If environmental conditions deteriorate--for instance, if all the food is used up--this species of Rhizopus reproduces sexually. The parents in a sexual union are mycelia of opposite mating types, identical in appearance but different in the chemical markers that mates recognize. Plasmogamy produces a resistant structure called a zygosporangium, in which karyogamy and then meiosis occur (FIGURE 31.7). Note that a zygosporangium, while representing the zygote (2n) stage in the life cycle, is not a zygote in the usual sense of a cell with one diploid nucleus. Rather, the zygosporangium is a multinucleate structure, first heterokaryotic with many nuclei from the two parents, then with many diploid nuclei after karyogamy.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 31-6. The common mold Rhizopus decomposing strawberries.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 31-7. The life cycle of the zygomycete Rhizopus (black bread mold). 
			  
		Neighboring mycelia of opposite mating types (designated + and -) 
			  
		 form hyphal extensions called gametangia, each walled off around several haploid nuclei by a septum. 
			  
		The gametangia undergo plasmogamy (fusion of cytoplasm), forming a heterokaryotic zygosporangium containing multiple haploid nuclei from the two parents. 
			  
		This cell develops a rough, thick-walled coating (upper right LM) that can resist dry conditions and other harsh environments for months. 
			  
		When conditions are favorable again, karyogamy occurs. Paired nuclei fuse, followed by meiosis. 
			  
		The zygosporangium then breaks dormancy, germinating into a short sporangium that 
			  
		disperses genetically diverse, haploid spores. 
			  
		These spores germinate and grow into new mycelia. 
			  
		Mycelia of Rhizopus can also reproduce asexually by forming sporangia (lower left LM) that produce genetically identical haploid spores.

The zygosporangia, for which zygomycetes are named, are resistant to freezing and drying and are metabolically inactive. When conditions improve, the zygosporangia release genetically diverse haploid spores that colonize the new substrate. Some zygomycetes, such as Pilobolus, can actually aim their spores (FIGURE 31.8).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 31-8. Pilobolus aiming its sporangia. This zygomycete decomposes animal dung. The mycelium bends its sporangium-bearing hyphae toward bright light, where grass is likely to be growing. The fungus then shoots its sporangia like cannonballs; they can land and stick to grass as far as 2 m away. Grazing animals such as cows scatter the spores in feces.




