
 Atomic structure determines the behavior of an element

Each element consists of a certain kind of atom that is different from the atoms of any other element. An atom is the smallest unit of matter that still retains the properties of an element. Atoms are so small that it would take about a million of them to stretch across the period printed at the end of this sentence. We symbolize atoms with the same abbreviation used for the element made up of those atoms; thus, C stands for both the element carbon and a single carbon atom.

Subatomic Particles

Although the atom is the smallest unit having the properties of its element, these tiny bits of matter are composed of even smaller parts, called subatomic particles. Physicists have split the atom into more than a hundred types of particles, but only three kinds of particles are stable enough to be of relevance here: neutrons, protons, and electrons. Neutrons and protons are packed together tightly to form a dense core, or atomic nucleus, at the center of the atom. The electrons, moving at nearly the speed of light, form a cloud around the nucleus (FIGURE 2.5).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 2-5. Two simplified models of a helium (He) atom. The helium nucleus consists of 2 neutrons (gray) and 2 protons (magenta). Two electrons move rapidly around the nucleus. In model (a), the electrons are represented as a cloud of negative charge. The cloud is not to scale; it is actually much bigger relative to the nucleus. In (b), the electrons are shown as small blue spheres; the circle indicates that their average distance from the nucleus is about two-thirds of the radius of the electron cloud. (Our model of an atom will be refined as the chapter progresses.)

Electrons and protons are electrically charged. Each electron has one unit of negative charge, and each proton has one unit of positive charge. A neutron, as its name implies, is electrically neutral. Protons give the nucleus a positive charge, and it is the attraction between opposite charges that keeps the rapidly moving electrons in the vicinity of the nucleus.

The neutron and proton are almost identical in mass, each about 1.7 &#160;X&#160; 10-24 gram (g). Grams and other conventional units are not very useful for describing the mass of objects so minuscule. Thus, for atoms and subatomic particles (and for molecules, as well), we use a unit of measurement called the dalton, in honor of John Dalton, the British scientist who helped develop atomic theory around 1800. (The dalton is the same as the atomic mass unit, or amu, a unit you may have encountered elsewhere.) Neutrons and protons have masses close to 1 dalton. Because the mass of an electron is only about 1/2,000 that of a neutron or proton, we can ignore electrons when computing the total mass of an atom.

Atomic Number and Atomic Weight

Atoms of the various elements differ in their number of subatomic particles. All atoms of a particular element have the same number of protons in their nuclei. This number of protons, which is unique to that element, is referred to as the atomic number and is written as a subscript to the left of the symbol for the element. The abbreviation 2He, for example, tells us that an atom of the element helium has 2 protons in its nucleus. Unless otherwise indicated, an atom is neutral in electrical charge, which means that its protons must be balanced by an equal number of electrons. Therefore, the atomic number tells us the number of protons and also the number of electrons in an electrically neutral atom.

We can deduce the number of neutrons from a second quantity, the mass number, which is the sum of protons plus neutrons in the nucleus of an atom. The mass number is written as a superscript to the left of an element's symbol. For example, we can use this shorthand to write an atom of helium as 24He. Because the atomic number indicates how many protons there are, we can determine the number of neutrons by subtracting the atomic number from the mass number: A 24He atom has 2 neutrons. An atom of sodium, 1123Na, has 11 protons, 11 electrons, and 12 neutrons. The simplest atom is hydrogen 11H, which has no neutrons; it consists of a lone proton with a single electron moving around it.

Almost all of an atom's mass is concentrated in its nucleus, because the contribution of electrons to mass is negligible. Because neutrons and protons each have a mass very close to 1 dalton, the mass number is an approximation of the total mass of an atom, usually called its atomic weight. So, we might say that the atomic weight of helium (24He) is 4 daltons, although more precisely it is 4.003 daltons.

Isotopes

All atoms of a given element have the same number of protons, but some atoms have more neutrons than other atoms of the same element and therefore weigh more. These different atomic forms are referred to as isotopes of the element. In nature, an element occurs as a mixture of its isotopes. For example, consider the three isotopes of the element carbon, which has the atomic number 6. The most common isotope is carbon-12, 126C, which accounts for about 99%  of the carbon in nature. It has 6 neutrons. Most of the remaining 1%  of carbon consists of atoms of the isotope 136C, with 7 neutrons. A third, even rarer isotope, 146C, has 8 neutrons. Notice that all three isotopes of carbon have 6 protons--otherwise, they would not be carbon. Although isotopes of an element have slightly different masses, they behave identically in chemical reactions. (The number usually given as the atomic weight of an element is actually an average of the atomic weights of all the element's naturally occurring isotopes.)

Both 12C and 13C are stable isotopes, meaning that their nuclei do not have a tendency to lose particles. The isotope 14C, however, is unstable, or radioactive. A radioactive isotope is one in which the nucleus decays spontaneously, giving off particles and energy. When the decay leads to a change in the number of protons, it transforms the atom to an atom of a different element. For example, radioactive carbon decays to form nitrogen.

Radioactive isotopes have many useful applications in biology. In Chapter 25, you will learn how researchers use measurements of radioactivity in fossils to date those relics of past life. Radioactive isotopes are also useful as tracers to follow atoms through metabolism, the chemical processes of an organism. Cells use the radioactive atoms as they would nonradioactive isotopes of the same element, but the radioactive tracers can be readily detected. FIGURE 2.6 shows two methods biologists use to monitor radioactive tracers.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 2-6. Using radioactive isotopes to study cell chemistry. Scientists use radioactive isotopes to label certain chemical substances in order to follow a metabolic process or locate the substance within a cell or an organism. (a) This researcher is performing an experiment to determine how temperature affects the rate at which certain cells make new copies of their DNA. First, the cells are placed in a medium that includes the ingredients for making DNA. One ingredient is labeled with 3H, a radioactive isotope of hydrogen. Any new DNA the cells make will incorporate 3H. Separate samples of the cells in their radioactive medium are incubated at different temperatures. After an allotted amount of time, samples are taken from each culture and their DNA is tested for radioactivity in a device called a scintillation counter (shown here). The DNA samples are placed in vials containing a fluid that emits flashes of light whenever radiation from the decay of the 3H tracer in the DNA excites chemicals in the fluid. The frequency of flashes, proportional to the amount of radioactive DNA present, is measured in counts per minute. When the counts for the various DNA samples are plotted against the temperature at which the cells were grown, as in the graph here, it is apparent that temperature dramatically affects the rate of DNA synthesis. This result might be useful to researchers studying the details of DNA synthesis. (b) A technique known as autoradiography can be used to locate the radioactively labeled DNA from part (a) within the cells. Thin slices of the cells are placed on glass slides and kept for some time in the dark covered by a layer of photographic emulsion. Radiation from the radioactive tracer present in any new DNA exposes the photographic emulsion, creating a pattern of black dots. In the photo, radioactive DNA in the cell on the left is clearly located in the cell's nucleus.

Radioactive tracers are important diagnostic tools in medicine. For example, certain kidney disorders can be diagnosed by injecting small doses of substances containing radioactive isotopes into the blood and then measuring the amount of tracer excreted in the urine. Radioactive tracers are also used in combination with sophisticated imaging instruments, such as PET scanners, which can monitor chemical processes as they actually occur in the body (FIGURE 2.7).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 2-7. A PET scan, --a medical use for radioactive isotopes. PET, an acronym for positron-emission tomography, detects locations of intense chemical activity in the body. The patient is first injected with a nutrient such as glucose labeled with a radioactive isotope that emits subatomic particles called positrons. The positrons collide with electrons made available by chemical reactions in the body. A PET scanner detects the energy released in these collisions and maps as "hot spots" the regions of an organ that are most chemically active at the time. The color of the image varies with the amount of the isotope present in an area. In this image the bright yellow color identifies cancerous bone tissue in the patient's spine and at the bottom of one shoulder blade.

Although radioactive isotopes are very useful in biological research and medicine, radiation from decaying isotopes also poses a hazard to life by damaging cellular molecules. The severity of this damage depends on the type and amount of radiation an organism absorbs. One of the most serious environmental threats is radioactive fallout from nuclear accidents (FIGURE 2.8).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 2-8. The Tokaimura nuclear accident. In 1999, workers at a nuclear power plant in Tokaimura, Japan, accidentally triggered a chain reaction that leaked large amounts of radioactivity into the surroundings. The accident exposed 46 workers in the plant to dangerous radiation doses. A mile from the plant, radiation levels peaked at 15,000 times higher than normal. About 300,000 people in nearby towns were checked for radioactive contamination, as shown here, and will continue to be monitored for possible long-term damage, such as cancers.

The Energy Levels of Electrons

The simplified models of the atom in FIGURE 2.5 greatly exaggerate the size of the nucleus relative to the volume of the whole atom. If the nucleus were the size of a golf ball, the electrons would be moving about the nucleus at an average distance of approximately 1 kilometer (km). Atoms are mostly empty space.

When two atoms approach each other during a chemical reaction, their nuclei do not come close enough to interact. Of the three kinds of subatomic particles we have discussed, only electrons are directly involved in the chemical reactions between atoms.

An atom's electrons vary in the amount of energy they possess. Energy is defined as the ability to do work. Potential energy is the energy that matter stores because of its position or location. For example, because of its altitude, water in a reservoir on a hill has potential energy. When the gates of the reservoir's dam are opened and the water runs downhill, the energy comes out of storage to do work, such as turning generators. Because potential energy has been expended, the water stores less energy at the bottom of the hill than it did in the reservoir. Matter has a natural tendency to move to the lowest possible state of potential energy; in this example, water runs downhill. To restore the potential energy of a reservoir, work must be done to elevate the water against gravity.

The electrons of an atom also have potential energy because of their position in relation to the nucleus. The negatively charged electrons are attracted to the positively charged nucleus; the more distant the electrons are from the nucleus, the greater their potential energy. Unlike the continuous flow of water downhill, changes in the potential energy of electrons can occur only in steps of fixed amounts. An electron having a certain discrete amount of energy is something like a ball on a staircase. The ball can have different amounts of potential energy, depending on which step it is on, but it cannot spend much time between the steps. An electron cannot exist in between its fixed states of potential energy.

The different states of potential energy that electrons have in an atom are called energy levels, or electron shells (FIGURE 2.9). The first shell is closest to the nucleus, and electrons in this shell have the lowest energy. Electrons in the second shell have more energy, electrons in the third shell more energy still, and so on. An electron can change its shell, but only by absorbing or losing an amount of energy equal to the difference in potential energy between the old shell and the new shell. To move to a shell farther out from the nucleus, the electron must absorb energy. For example, light energy can excite an electron to a higher energy level. (Indeed, this is the first step when plants harness the energy of sunlight for photosynthesis, the process that produces food from carbon dioxide and water.) To move to a shell closer to the nucleus, an electron must lose energy, which is usually released to the environment in the form of heat. For example, when sunlight excites electrons in the paint of a dark car roof to higher energy levels, the roof heats up as the electrons fall back to their original levels.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 2-9. Energy levels of an atom's electrons. Electrons exist only at fixed levels of potential energy, which are also called electron shells. An electron can move from one level to another only if the energy it gains or loses is exactly equal to the difference in energy between the two levels. Arrows indicate some of the stepwise changes in potential energy that are possible.

Electron Configuration and Chemical Properties

The chemical behavior of an atom is determined by its electron configuration--that is, the distribution of electrons in the atom's electron shells. Beginning with hydrogen, the simplest atom, we can imagine building the atoms of the other elements by adding 1 proton and 1 electron at a time (along with an appropriate number of neutrons). FIGURE 2.10, an abbreviated version of what is called a periodic table, shows this distribution of electrons for the first 18 elements, from hydrogen (1H) to argon (18Ar). The elements are arranged in three rows, or periods, corresponding to the number of electron shells in their atoms. The left-to-right sequence of elements in each row corresponds to the sequential addition of electrons (and protons).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 2-10. Electron configurations of the first 18 elements. In these diagrams, electrons are shown as blue dots and energy levels (electron shells) as concentric rings. The elements are arranged in rows, each representing the filling of an electron shell. As electrons are added, they occupy the lowest available shell. Hydrogen's 1 electron and helium's 2 electrons are located in the first shell. The next element, lithium, has 3 electrons. Two electrons fill the first shell while the third electron occupies the second shell (the lowest available shell). The outermost energy level occupied by electrons is called the valence shell. Elements with the same number of valence electrons--fluorine and chlorine, for instance--have similar chemical properties.

Hydrogen's 1 electron and helium's 2 electrons are located in the first shell. Electrons, like all matter, tend to exist in the lowest available state of potential energy, which they have in the first shell. However, the first shell can hold no more than 2 electrons. An atom with more than 2 electrons must use higher shells because the first shell is full. The next element, lithium, has 3 electrons. Two of these electrons fill the first shell while the third electron occupies the second shell. The second shell holds a maximum of 8 electrons. Neon, at the end of the second row, has 8 electrons in the second shell, giving it a total of 10 electrons.

The chemical behavior of an atom depends mostly on the number of electrons in its outermost shell. We refer to those outer electrons as valence electrons and to the outermost electron shell as the valence shell. In the case of lithium, there is only 1 valence electron, and the second shell is the valence shell. Atoms with the same number of electrons in their valence shells exhibit similar chemical behavior. For example, fluorine (F) and chlorine (Cl) both have 7 valence electrons, and both combine with the element sodium to form compounds (see FIGURE 2.2). An atom with a completed valence shell is unreactive; that is, it will not interact readily with other atoms it encounters. At the far right of the periodic table are helium, neon, and argon, the only three elements shown in FIGURE 2.10 that have full valence shells. These elements are said to be inert, meaning chemically unreactive. All the other atoms in FIGURE 2.10 are chemically reactive because they have incomplete valence shells.

Electron Orbitals

Early in the 20th century, the electron shells of an atom were visualized as concentric paths of electrons orbiting the nucleus, somewhat like planets orbiting the sun. It is still convenient to use concentric-circle diagrams to symbolize electron shells, as in FIGURE 2.10. The atom is not this simple, however. In fact, we can never know the exact path of an electron. What we can do instead is describe the space in which an electron spends most of its time. The three-dimensional space where an electron is found 90%  of the time is called an orbital. Each electron shell consists of a specific number of orbitals of specific shapes (FIGURE 2.11).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 2-11. Electron orbitals. The three-dimensional shapes in the top half of this figure represent electron orbitals--the volumes of space where the electrons of an atom are most likely to be found. Each orbital holds a maximum of 2 electrons. The bottom half of the figure shows the equivalent electron-shell diagrams. (a) The first electron shell has one spherical (s) orbital, designated 1s. Only this orbital is occupied in hydrogen, which has 1 electron, and helium, which has 2 electrons. (b) The second and all higher shells each have one larger s orbital (designated 2s for the second shell) plus three dumbbell-shaped orbitals called p orbitals (2p for the second shell). The three 2p orbitals lie at right angles to one another along imaginary x, y, and z axes of the atom. (The third and higher electron shells can hold additional electrons in orbitals of more complex shapes.) (c) To symbolize the electron orbitals of the element neon, which has a total of 10 electrons, we superimpose the 1s orbital of the first shell and the 2s and three 2p orbitals of the second shell. (Each orbital, remember, can hold 2 electrons.)

No more than 2 electrons can occupy the same orbital. The first electron shell has a single orbital and can thereby accommodate a maximum of 2 electrons. This orbital, which is spherical in shape, is designated the 1s orbital. The lone electron of a hydrogen atom occupies the 1s orbital, as do the 2 electrons of a helium atom. The second electron shell has four orbitals and therefore can hold 8 electrons. Electrons in each of the four orbitals have nearly the same energy, but they move in different volumes of space. There is a 2s orbital, spherical in shape like the 1s orbital, but with a greater diameter. The other three orbitals, called 2p orbitals, are dumbbell-shaped. Each 2p orbital is oriented at right angles to the other two. (The third and higher electron shells also have s and p orbitals, as well as orbitals of more complex shapes.)

The reactivity of atoms arises from the presence of unpaired electrons in one or more orbitals of their valence shells. Recall that the electronic configurations in FIGURE 2.10 build up with the addition of 1 electron at a time. Like strangers getting on a bus with seats for two, each additional electron occupies a separate orbital until no empty orbitals remain in a shell. Only then do the orbitals begin to receive a second electron. The paired dots in FIGURE 2.10 represent paired electrons sharing an orbital. When atoms interact to complete their valence shells, it is the unpaired electrons that are involved.




