
 In aquatic ecosystems, light and nutrients limit primary production

What controls primary production in ecosystems? To ask this question another way, what factors could we change to increase or decrease primary production for a given ecosystem? We will look first at the factors that limit production in aquatic ecosystems, beginning with marine ecosystems.

Production in Marine Ecosystems

Light is the first variable one might expect to control primary production in oceans, since solar radiation drives photosynthesis. The depth to which light penetrates the ocean affects primary production throughout the photic zone (see FIGURE 50.22). More than half of the solar radiation is absorbed in the first meter of water. Even in "clear" water, only 5-10%  of the radiation may reach a depth of 20 m.

If light is the primary variable limiting primary production in the ocean, we would expect production to increase along a gradient from the poles toward the equator, which receives the greatest intensity of light (see FIGURE 50.11). However, you can see that there is no such gradient by reexamining FIGURE 54.4. Some parts of the tropics and subtropics, such as the Sargasso Sea, the Indian Ocean, and the central part of the North Pacific, are very unproductive. In contrast, the North Atlantic, the Gulf of Alaska, and the Southern Ocean off New Zealand are relatively productive areas.

Why are tropical oceans less productive than we would expect from their high year-round intensity of illumination? It is actually nutrients more than light that limit primary production in different geographic regions of the ocean. Ecologists use the term limiting nutrient for the nutrient that must be added for production to increase. And two elements, nitrogen and phosphorus, are the nutrients that most often limit marine production. In the open ocean, nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations are very low in the photic (upper) zone, where phytoplankton live. Ironically, the nutrient supply is much better in deeper water, where it is too dark for photosynthesis (FIGURE 54.5).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 54-5. Vertical distribution of temperature, nutrients, and production in the upper layer of the central North Pacific during summer. The curves are composites of several vertical profiles made over a two-day period at a single location (28&#176;N, 155&#176;W). Chlorophyll is a measure of phytoplankton density. The broken line illustrates the depth of 1%  of surface light (the traditional definition of the depth of the photic zone). Note that nitrate has been depleted to undetectable levels in the photic zone, but that most of the primary production (measured from 14C uptake) takes place in that nutrient-depleted zone because of the requirement for light.

Nitrogen is the one nutrient that limits phytoplankton growth in many parts of the ocean. FIGURE 54.6 illustrates an experimental test of nitrogen versus phosphorus as the limiting factor for production in coastal waters off the south shore of Long Island, New York. Pollution from duck farms along the bays of Long Island adds both nitrogen and phosphorus to the coastal water; but unlike phosphorus, the nitrogen is immediately taken up by algae, and no trace of free nitrogen can be measured in the coastal waters. Nutrient enrichment experiments confirmed that nitrogen was limiting phytoplankton growth. The addition of nitrogen (in the form of ammonium) caused a heavy algal growth in bay water, but the addition of phosphate did not induce algal growth. There are some practical applications of this work, including the prevention of algal blooms caused by pollution that fertilizes the phytoplankton. If nitrogen is the factor now limiting phytoplankton production in the coastal zone, the elimination of phosphates from sewage will not help the problem of coastal pollution unless we first control nitrogen pollution.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 54-6. Experiments on nutrient limitations to phytoplankton production in coastal waters of Long Island.

Although nitrogen availability generally limits primary production in marine ecosystems, there are some anomalies. Several large areas of the ocean have low phytoplankton densities in spite of relatively high nitrogen concentrations. For example, in the Sargasso Sea, a subtropical region of the Atlantic Ocean, the water is among the most transparent in the world because of a very low density of phytoplankton. When researchers conducted a series of nutrient enrichment experiments, they found that it was availability of the micronutrient iron that limited primary production, not nitrogen or phosphorus (TABLE 54.1).

Table 54-1. Nutrient Enrichment Experiment for Sargasso Sea Samples

Natrients Added to Experimental Culture *Relative Uptake of 14C by Cultures*None (controls)1.00N + P only1.10N + P + metals (exculding iron)1.08N + P + metals (including iron)12.90N + P + iron12.00*N = nitrogen: P = phosphorus.*14 uptake by cultures measures primary production.SOURCE: Data from Menzel and Ryther, Deep Sea Research 7(1961):276-281.Evidence that iron limits production in some oceanic ecosystems encouraged marine ecologists to try two large-scale field experiments in the tropical Pacific in 1993 and 1995. The researchers spread low concentrations of dissolved iron over 72 km2 of ocean and then measured the change in phytoplankton density over a seven-day period. A massive phytoplankton bloom occurred, as indicated by a 27-fold increase in chlorophyll concentration in water samples from the test sites.

Why are iron concentrations naturally low in certain oceanic regions? Windblown dust from the land is the main process delivering iron to the ocean, and relatively little dust reaches the central Pacific and central Atlantic Oceans.

The iron factor in marine ecosystems is actually related to the nitrogen factor. Where iron is limiting, additions stimulate growth of cyanobacteria that fix nitrogen, converting atmospheric N2 to nitrogenous minerals (see Chapter 27). These nitrogenous nutrients in turn stimulate proliferation of eukaryotic phytoplankton: 

Areas of upwelling in the ocean are the main exceptions to primary production being limited by nutrients. The largest area of upwelling occurs in the Antarctic Ocean, where nutrient-rich deep waters circulate to the surface near the Antarctic continent. Other areas of upwelling are the coastal waters off Peru and California. Because the steady supply of nutrients stimulates phytoplankton production at the base of food webs, areas of upwelling are prime fishing locations.

Marine ecologists are just beginning to piece together the interplay of factors that determine primary production in the oceans. One of the most important technical breakthroughs is the remote sensing of primary production data collected by satellites (FIGURE 54.7).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 54-7. Remote sensing of primary production in oceans. This 1995 satellite image maps locations of high primary production in the Pacific region around Vancouver Island, British Columbia. A spectral instrument estimates chlorophyll concentrations in surface waters and converts the data to contrasting artificial colors. The areas that are green, red, or white in the color-enhanced photo are the richest in chlorophyll and hence phytoplankton. Note the phytoplankton bloom off the west coast of Vancouver Island. The second big bloom, in the sound between the island and the mainland, is due to a plume of nutrient-rich water from the Fraser River.

Production in Freshwater Ecosystems

Solar radiation limits primary production on a day-to-day basis in lakes, and within any given lake, you can predict the daily primary production from the solar radiation for that day. Temperature is closely linked with light intensity in freshwater systems and is difficult to evaluate as a separate factor. Nutrient limitations are also common in freshwater lakes.

During the 1970s, interest in what controls primary production in freshwater lakes became associated with the environmental issue of increasing water pollution. Sewage and fertilizer runoff from farms and yards added nutrients to lakes. This shifted many lakes from having phytoplankton communities dominated by diatoms or green algae to having phytoplankton communities dominated by cyanobacteria. This process, eutrophication, has generally undesirable impacts from a human perspective, including the eventual loss of fish from lakes (see FIGURE 50.19b). Controlling eutrophication requires knowing which polluting nutrient enables the cyanobacteria to bloom. Unlike the situation in marine ecosystems, nitrogen is rarely the limiting factor for primary production in lakes. In the 1970s, David Schindler, whom you met in the interview on p. 1190, conducted a series of whole-lake experiments that pointed to phosphorus as the limiting nutrient that stimulated the cyanobacterial blooms (FIGURE 54.8). His research led to the use of phosphate-free detergents and other water quality reforms.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 54-8. The experimental eutrophication of a lake. The far basin of this lake was separated from the near basin by a plastic curtain and fertilized with inorganic sources of carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus. Within two months, the fertilized basin was covered with a cyanobacterial bloom, which appears white in the photograph. The near basin, which was treated with only carbon and nitrogen, remained unchanged. In this case, phosphorus was the key limiting nutrient, and its addition stimulated the explosive growth of cyanobacteria.




