
 Modern systematics is flourishing with lively debate

Systematics is thriving today at the interface of modern evolutionary biology and current taxonomic theory. Biologists have been accumulating phenotypic information, mainly morphological, about diverse species, living and extinct, for centuries. The development of cladistics provided more objective methods for comparing morphology and incorporating the data into phylogenetic hypotheses, or cladograms. Molecular systematics added a powerful new tool in comparative biology, extending the analysis of phylogenetic relationships down to the level of DNA.

Cladistic analysis and molecular systematics, complemented by a revival of interest in paleontology and comparative biology in the past few decades, are stimulating a reassessment of phylogeny that is bringing us closer to understanding the history of life on Earth. In many cases, independent approaches, such as paleontology and DNA sequencing, converge in supporting a particular phylogenetic hypothesis. For example, the fossil record, comparative anatomy, and molecular comparisons all concur that crocodiles are more closely related to birds than to lizards and snakes, a conclusion that probably would have surprised Linnaeus and Darwin (FIGURE 25.18).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 25-18. Modern systematics is shaking some phylogenetic trees. In our traditional vertebrate taxonomy, crocodiles, snakes, lizards, and other reptiles are classified in the class Reptilia, while birds are placed in a separate class (Aves). But most vertebrate systematists now agree that crocodiles are actually more closely related to birds than they are to lizards and snakes. Thus, the class Reptilia, in its traditional form, is paraphyletic, not monophyletic (see FIGURE 25.9).

In other cases, molecular data are at odds with other evidence, such as the fossil record. One such debate centers on the origin of the major groups (orders) of mammals. The oldest fossils of mammals date back 220 million years, into the Triassic period (see TABLE 25.1). However, fossils documenting the origin of most modern mammalian orders are much younger, dating to the early Tertiary period, about 60 million years ago, after the extinction of the dinosaurs. In apparent contradiction of the fossil evidence, molecular clocks push the origin of the major mammalian orders back closer to 100 million years ago. Many researchers place more trust in the fossil evidence and express doubts about whether the molecular clocks are reliable. The counterargument is that the paleontologists have not yet documented an earlier origin for most mammalian orders because the fossil record is incomplete. Between these two extremes is a phylogenetic fuse hypothesis: Perhaps the modern mammalian orders originated about 100 million years ago, but did not proliferate extensively enough to be noticeable in the fossil record until after the extinction of the dinosaurs almost 40 million years later (FIGURE 25.19). Additional research may help to resolve the debate about mammalian history.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 25-19. When did most major mammalian orders originate? These simplified trees include just four orders of mammals. (a) According to the fossil record, the orders are tens of millions of years younger than the age inferred from (b) molecular clocks. (c) A possible reconciliation is the "phylogenetic fuse" hypothesis of an earlier origin followed by a later diversification within the orders. According to this hypothesis, the "explosion," symbolized in the diagram by the thicker lines, made the animals abundant and widespread enough to show up in the fossil record.

Note again that the cladistic approach focuses only on the sequence of phylogenetic branching in evolution, not on the degree of evolutionary divergence between branches. To appreciate this distinction, return to FIGURE 25.18. A strict practitioner of cladistics would argue that a taxonomic separation of crocodiles and birds in the vertebrate classes Reptilia and Aves, respectively, is obsolete. Other evolutionary biologists counter that a useful taxonomy should reflect both features of phylogenetic trees: the sequence of branching and the extent of divergence between branches. In the case of birds, many biologists still prefer to assign them to a class separate from all reptiles because the evolutionary adaptations of birds associated with flight have been so extensive. We will examine many such debates about classification in the next unit of chapters, which surveys the diversity of life in an evolutionary context.

In this unit, we have seen how the Darwinian theme of descent with modification has shaped all of biology. We have also seen that evolutionary theory itself has evolved as new methods, new data, and new ideas have continued to refine our view of life. Vigorous debate is vital to that progress and is a healthy sign that evolutionary biology is a robust science.




