
 The metabolism of soil bacteria makes nitrogen available to plants

It is ironic that plants sometimes suffer nitrogen deficiencies, for the atmosphere is nearly 80%  nitrogen. This atmospheric nitrogen, however, is gaseous N2, and plants cannot use nitrogen in that form. For plants to absorb nitrogen, it must first be converted to ammonium (NH4+) or nitrate (NO3-). In contrast to other minerals, the NH4+ and NO3- in soil are not derived from the breakdown of parent rock. Over the short term, the main source of nitrogenous minerals is the decomposition of humus by microbes, including ammonifying bacteria (FIGURE 37.9). In this way, nitrogen present in organic compounds, such as proteins, is repackaged in inorganic compounds that can be recycled when they are absorbed as minerals by roots. However, nitrogen is lost from this local cycle when soil microbes called denitrifying bacteria convert NO3- to N2, which diffuses from the soil to the atmosphere. Still other bacteria, called nitrogen-fixing bacteria, restock nitrogenous minerals in the soil by converting N2 to NH3 (ammonia), a metabolic process called nitrogen fixation. The complex cycling of nitrogen in ecosystems is traced in detail in Chapter 54. Here we focus on nitrogen fixation and the other steps that lead directly to nitrogen assimilation by plants.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 37-9. The role of soil bacteria in the nitrogen nutrition of plants. Ammonium is made available to plants by two types of soil bacteria: those that fix atmospheric N2 (nitrogen-fixing bacteria) and those that decompose organic material (ammonifying bacteria). Although plants absorb some ammonium from the soil, they absorb mainly nitrate, which is produced from ammonium by nitrifying bacteria. Plants reduce nitrate back to ammonium before incorporating the nitrogen into organic compounds. Xylem transports nitrogen from roots to shoots in the form of nitrate, amino acids, and various other organic compounds, depending on the species.

All life on Earth depends on nitrogen fixation, a process performed only by certain prokaryotes. Soil is populated by sev eral species of free-living bacteria that are among the nitrogen-fixing prokaryotes. (Other species of nitrogen-fixing bacteria live in plant roots in symbiotic relationships you will learn more about in the next section.) The conversion of atmospheric nitrogen (N2) to ammonia (NH3) is a complicated, multi-step process, but we can simplify nitrogen fixation by just indicating the reactants and products:  One enzyme complex, called nitrogenase, catalyzes the entire reaction sequence, which reduces N2 to NH3 by adding electrons along with hydrogen ions. Notice that nitrogen fixation is very expensive in terms of metabolic energy, costing the bacteria eight ATP molecules for each ammonia molecule synthesized. Nitrogen-fixing bacteria are most abundant in soils rich in organic material, which provides fuel for cellular respiration.

In the soil solution, ammonia picks up another hydrogen ion to form ammonium (NH4+), which plants can absorb. However, plants acquire their nitrogen mainly in the form of nitrate (NO3-), which is produced in the soil by nitrifying bacteria that oxidize ammonium (see FIGURE 37.9). After nitrate is absorbed by roots, a plant enzyme can reduce the nitrate back to ammonium, which other enzymes can then incorporate into amino acids and other organic compounds. Most plant species export nitrogen from roots to shoots, via the xylem, in the form of nitrate or organic compounds that have been synthesized in the roots.




