
 Mycorrhizae are symbiotic associations of roots and fungi that enhance plant nutrition

Mycorrhizae ("fungus roots") are modified roots consisting of symbiotic associations of fungi and roots (see FIGURES 31.18 and 36.8). The symbiosis is mutualistic. The fungus benefits from a hospitable environment and a steady supply of sugar donated by the host plant. In return, the fungus increases the surface area for water uptake and selectively absorbs phosphate and other minerals from the soil and supplies them to the plant. The fungi of mycorrhizae also secrete growth factors that stimulate roots to grow and branch. And the fungi produce antibiotics that may help protect the plant from pathogenic bacteria and pathogenic fungi in the soil.

Mycorrhizae are not oddities; they are formed by almost all plant species. In fact, this plant-fungus symbiosis might have been one of the evolutionary adaptations that made it possible for plants to colonize land in the first place; fossilized roots from some of the earliest plants include mycorrhizae (see Chapter 31). When terrestrial ecosystems were young, the soil was probably not very rich in nutrients. The fungi of mycorrhizae, which are more efficient at absorbing minerals than the roots themselves, would have helped nourish the pioneering plants. Even today, the plants that first become established on nutrient-poor soils, such as abandoned farmland or eroded hillsides, are usually well endowed with mycorrhizae.

The Two Main Types of Mycorrhizae

The modified roots formed from the symbiosis of fungi and plants take two major forms: ectomycorrhizae and endomy corrhizae. In ectomycorrhizae, the mycelium (mass of branching hyphae; see Chapter 31) forms a dense sheath, or mantle, over the surface of the root (FIGURE 37.14a). Hyphae extend from the mantle into the soil, greatly increasing the surface area for water and mineral absorption. Fungal hyphae also grow into the cortex of the root. These hyphae do not penetrate the root cells but form a network in the extracellular spaces that facilitates nutrient exchange between the fungus and the plant. Compared with "uninfected" roots, ectomycorrhizae are generally thicker, shorter, and more branched. Ectomycorrhizae do not form root hairs, which would be superfluous given the extensive surface area of the fungal mycelium. Ectomycorrhizae are especially common in woody plants, including trees of the pine, spruce, oak, walnut, birch, willow, and eucalyptus families.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 37-14. Mycorrhizae.

In contrast to ectomycorrhizae, endomycorrhizae do not have a dense mantle ensheathing the root (FIGURE 37.14b). It takes a microscope to see the fine fungal hyphae that extend from the root into the soil. Hyphae also extend inward (hence the term endomycorrhizae) by digesting small patches of the root cell walls. A hypha does not actually pierce the plasma membrane and enter the cytoplasm of the host cell, but instead grows into a tube formed by invagination of the root cell's membrane. The action is analogous to poking a finger gently into a balloon; your finger is like the fungal hypha, and the skin of the balloon is like the plant cell's membrane. Once they have penetrated in this way, some of the fungal hyphae become highly branched to form dense knotlike structures called arbuscles. These arbuscles are important sites of nutrient transfer between the fungus and the plant. To the unaided eye, endomycorrhizae look like "normal" roots with root hairs, but a microscope reveals a symbiotic relationship of enormous importance to plant nutrition. Endomycorrhizae, much more common than ectomycorrhizae, are found in over 90%  of plant species, including important crop plants such as corn, wheat, and legumes.

Agricultural Importance of Mycorrhizae

Roots can be transformed into mycorrhizae only if they are exposed to the appropriate species of fungus. In most natural ecosystems, these fungi are present in soil, and seedlings develop mycorrhizae. But if seeds are collected in one environment and planted in foreign soil, the plants may show signs of malnutrition resulting from the absence of the plants' mycorrhizal partners. Researchers observe similar results in experiments in which soil fungi are poisoned. Farmers and foresters are already applying the lessons of such research. For example, inoculating pine seeds with spores of mycorrhizal fungi promotes the formation of mycorrhizae by the seedlings. Pine seedlings so infected grow more vigorously than trees without the fungal association.




