
 Most communities are in a state of nonequilibrium owing to disturbances

Disturbances are events, such as storms, fire, floods, droughts, overgrazing, or human activities, that damage communities, remove organisms from them, and alter resource availability. The types of disturbances and their frequency and severity vary from community to community. Storms disturb almost all communities, even those in deep oceans. Fire is a significant cause of disturbance in most terrestrial communities; grasslands and chaparral biomes are dependent on regular burning (FIGURE 53.16). Freezing is a frequent occurrence in many rivers, lakes, and ponds, and many streams and ponds are disturbed by spring flooding and seasonal drying. Disturbances often create opportunities for species that have not previously occupied habitats to become established. By gathering data from specific communities over many years, ecologists are beginning to appreciate and understand the impact of disturbances. Let's look at one example.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 53-16. Routine disturbance in a grassland community. Historically, prairie grasslands were often swept by fire. These photographs were taken (a) before, (b) during, and (c) after a controlled burn conducted by ecologists studying the long-term effects of fire on a tallgrass prairie in Kansas. (The trees in the photographs were growing along a stream and were not burned during the study.) (a) Before a controlled burn. A prairie that has not burned for several years has a high proportion of detritus (dead grass). (b) During. The detritus serves as fuel for fires. (c) After. Prairies regrow rapidly after a fire burns the detritus. Approximately one month after the controlled burn, virtually all of the biomass in this prairie was living.

The marine communities called coral reefs are subject to a variety of physical disturbances associated with tropical storms. At Heron Island Reef, at the southern edge of the Great Barrier Reef, in Queensland, Australia, ecologists used sequential sets of photographs to chronicle changes in coral cover at specific sites over a 30-year period. The scientists measured the area covered by colonies of live coral to estimate the abundance of the coral animals (see Chapter 33). The researchers also measured the "recruitment" of coral animal larvae that settle and found new colonies.

Violent storms were the main type of disturbance to Heron Island Reef, and the amount of damage caused by these cyclones depended on the position of the coral colonies on the reef (FIGURE 53.17). Sites exposed more to the open ocean were more subject to wave damage than sites sheltered by the island. Five cyclones passed near Heron Island during the 30 years of study from 1962 to 1992. Of the four study areas graphed in FIGURE 53.17, only the protected area of the inner flat was relatively unaffected by cyclones. Almost every cyclone caused a reduction in coral cover in the exposed pools. The 1972 cyclone completely removed coral cover on the exposed crest ("peak" of the reef), the most severe disturbance observed. Recovery on the exposed crest was slow for the next 25 years.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 53-17. Storm disturbance to coral reef communities. The graphs compare how five tropical cyclones (red arrows) affected coral cover at four regions of the Heron Island Reef in Australia. Damage from cyclones was highly variable, depending on how well the island protected the four sites. (The gradual decline in coral cover at the protected sites was a normal effect of the coral's upward growth, which increased the exposure of these sites to air over the 30 years of the study.)

Recruitment rates of new corals settling on free surfaces were highly variable, and this is typical of many marine invertebrates whose larvae drift in the plankton before settling. During the 30-year Heron Island Reef study, there were no particularly good or bad years for coral recruitment for an area as a whole. Recruitment rate was partly associated with how much free space there was in different areas. Coral larvae need free space to settle because they cannot attach to other living coral or to seaweeds.

What emerges from this case study is a picture of a coral community that changes continually because of the disturbance caused by tropical cyclones and the internal processes of growth and recruitment. Coral reefs are good examples of nonequilibrium communities. And there is mounting evidence that some amount of nonequilibrium resulting from disturbance is the norm for most communities. Communities are often in some state of recovery from disturbance.

We tend to think of disturbance as having a negative impact on communities, but this is not always the case. Small-scale disturbances sometimes enhance environmental patchiness, which can be important to the maintenance of species diversity in a community. Frequent small-scale disturbances can also prevent large-scale disturbances. The major fires that occurred in Yellowstone National Park during the summer of 1988 are an example of what can happen in the absence of smaller disturbances. Much of this park was dominated by lodgepole pine, a tree that requires the rejuvenating influence of periodic fires. Lodgepole cones remain closed until exposed to intense heat. When a forest fire destroys the parent trees, the cones open and the seeds are released. The new generation of lodgepole pines can then thrive on nutrients released from the burned trees and on the direct sunlight that was blocked by the old forest. Lodgepole pines that are over 100 years old become increasingly flammable, but for decades, fire suppression by humans had prevented small lightning-induced fires in Yellowstone Park that would have resulted in patches of less flammable trees. As a result, by 1988, about one-third of the Yellowstone trees were 250 to 300 years old. The drought conditions of 1988, combined with the fuel that had accumulated in the forests, resulted in a large-scale fire that destroyed the old lodgepole forests. Demonstrating that communities can often respond very rapidly to even such massive disturbance, burned areas in Yellowstone were largely covered with new vegetation the following year (FIGURE 53.18).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 53-18. Patchiness and recovery following a large-scale disturbance. The Yellowstone National Park fire of 1988 destroyed large areas of coniferous forests dominated by lodgepole pines. (a) Soon after fire. As this photo taken soon after the fire shows, the burn left a patchy landscape; note the unburned trees in the background. (b) One year after fire. This photo of the same general area taken the following year indicates how rapidly the com-munity began to recover. A variety of herbaceous plants, different from the species that inhabited the floor of the former forest, cover the ground.




