
 Multicellular eukaryotes evolved by 1.2 billion years ago

The origin of the more complex cells set the stage for a diversification of eukaryotic life. A great range of unicellular forms evolved, giving rise to a diversity of protists, and their single-celled descendants, that continue to flourish today. But multicellular forms also evolved. Their descendants include a variety of multicellular algae, plants, fungi, and animals. A multicellular organism, such as an animal, generally develops from a single cell--the fertilized egg, or zygote, in the case of sexual reproduction (see FIGURE 13.4). Cell division and cell differentiation help transform the single cell to a multicellular adult with many types of specialized cells.

Molecular clocks date the common ancestor of multicellular eukaryotes back to 1.5 billion years ago. However, the oldest known fossils of multicellular eukaryotes are of relatively small algae that lived about 1.2 billion years ago (FIGURE 26.6). Larger organisms, including animals such as jellies ("jellyfishes") and worms, do not appear in the fossil record until several hundred million years later, in the late Precambrian era about 600 million years ago (see FIGURE 26.1). Chinese paleontologists recently described a particularly rich fossil site 570 million years old containing a diversity of algae and animals, including some beautifully preserved embryos (FIGURE 26.7).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 26-6. Fossilized alga about 1.2 billion years old. Such fossils are the earliest evidence of organisms with more than one type of cell. At one end of this filamentous eukaryote is the bi-lobed "holdfast," which probably anchored the alga to its substratum. This fossil is among numerous such specimens collected on Somerset Island in arctic Canada.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 26-7. Fossilized animal embryos from Chinese sediments 570 million years old.

Geologists have recently reported evidence of a severe ice age enduring from 750 to 570 million years ago that may help to explain why multicellular eukaryotes were relatively limited in diversity and distribution until the very late Precambrian. This snowball Earth hypothesis is based partly on geologic clues that glaciers covered the planet's landmasses from pole to pole. The seas also would have been iced over. Thus, most life would have been confined to areas near deep-sea vents and hot springs or to those sparse locales where enough ice melted for sunlight to penetrate the surface waters of the seas. According to this hypothesis, the fossil record for the first major diversification of multicellular eukaryotes corresponds in time to the thawing of snowball Earth. A second radiation of eukaryotic forms produced most of the major groups of animals during the early Cambrian period, the first period of the Paleozoic era.




