
 Phylum Cnidaria: Cnidarians have radial symmetry, a gastrovascular cavity, and cnidocytes

Lacking mesoderm, the cnidarians (hydras, jellies, sea anemones, and coral animals) have a relatively simple body construction. Nonetheless, they are a diverse group with over 10,000 living species, most of which are marine.

The basic body plan of a cnidarian is a sac with a central digestive compartment, the gastrovascular cavity. A single opening to this cavity functions as both mouth and anus. This basic body plan has two variations: the sessile polyp and the floating medusa (FIGURE 33.4). Polyps are cylindrical forms that adhere to the substratum by the aboral end of the body and extend their tentacles, waiting for prey. Examples of the polyp form are hydras and sea anemones. A medusa is a flattened, mouthdown version of the polyp. It moves freely in the water by a combination of passive drifting and contractions of its bell-shaped body. The animals we generally call jellies are medusas. The tentacles of a jelly dangle from the oral surface, which points downward. Some cnidarians exist only as polyps, others only as medusas, and still others pass sequentially through both a medusa stage and a polyp stage in their life cycle.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-4. Polyp and medusa forms of cnidarians. The body wall of (a) a polyp or (b) a medusa has two layers of cells, an outer layer of epidermis (from ectoderm) specialized for protection and an inner layer of gastrodermis (from endoderm) for digestion. Digestion begins in the gastrovascular cavity and is completed within the gastrodermal cells in food vacuoles. Flagella on the gastrodermal cells keep the contents of the gastrovascular cavity agitated and help distribute nutrients. Sandwiched between the epidermis and gastrodermis is a gelatinous layer of mesoglea. In many medusas, the mesoglea is thick and jellylike--thus the name jellies.

Cnidarians are carnivores that use tentacles arranged in a ring around the mouth to capture prey and push the food into the gastrovascular cavity, where digestion begins. The undigested remains are egested through the mouth/anus. The tentacles are armed with batteries of cnidocytes, unique cells that function in defense and the capture of prey (FIGURE 33.5). Cnidocytes contain cnidae, capsule-like organelles capable of everting, giving phylum Cnidaria its name (from the Greek cnide, nettle). Cnidae called nematocysts are stinging capsules.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-5. A cnidocyte of a hydra. This type of cnidocyte contains a stinging capsule, the nematocyst, which itself contains an inverted thread. When a "trigger" is stimulated by touch or by certain chemicals, the thread shoots out from the nematocyst, puncturing and injecting poison into prey. Other kinds of cnidocytes have longer threads that stick to prey or entangle small animals that bump into the tentacles.

Muscles and nerves occur in their simplest forms in cnidarians. Cells of the epidermis (outer layer) and gastrodermis (inner layer) have bundles of microfilaments arranged into contractile fibers (see Chapter 7). True muscle tissue develops from mesoderm and does not appear in diploblastic animals. The gastrovascular cavity acts as a hydrostatic skeleton against which the contractile cells can work. When the animal closes its mouth, the volume of the cavity is fixed, and contraction of selected cells causes the animal to change shape. Movements are coordinated by a nerve net. Cnidarians have no brain, and the noncentralized nerve net is associated with simple sensory receptors that are distributed radially around the body. Thus, the animal can detect and respond to stimuli equally from all directions.

The phylum Cnidaria is divided into three major classes: Hydrozoa, Scyphozoa, and Anthozoa (TABLE 33.1; FIGURE 33.6, p. 650).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-6. Representatives of the cnidarian classes. (a) Polyps of a colonial species belonging to class Hydrozoa. (b) Jellies of class Scyphozoa. The medusa is the conspicuous stage of the scyphozoan life cycle. Many species of jellies, including this one, glow in the dark (bioluminescence). The largest scyphozoan species have tentacles over 100 m long dangling from umbrellas up to 2 m in diameter. (c) Sea anemones and other members of class Anthozoa exist only as polyps. (d) A colony of coral polyps (class Anthozoa). Many coral animals harbor symbiotic algae that contribute to the food supply of the polyps. Coral reefs, which provide habitats for an enormous variety of invertebrates and fishes, are restricted to warm, shallow seas. This is a star coral.

Table 33-1. Classes of Phylum Cnidaria

Class and ExamplesMain CharacteristicsHydrozoa (Portuguese man-of-war, hydras, Obelia, some corals) (see FIGURES 33.6a and 33.7)Most marine, a few freshwater; both polyp and medusa stages in; most species; polyp stage often colonialScyphozoa (jellies, sea wasp, sea nettle) (see FIGURE 33.6b)All marine; polyp stage reduced; free-swimming; medusas up to 2 m in diameterAnthozoa (sea anemones, most corals, sea fans) (see FIGURE 33.6c and d)All marine; medusa stage completely absent; sessile, many colonialClass Hydrozoa

Most hydrozoans alternate polyp and medusa forms, as in the life cycle of Obelia (FIGURE 33.7). The polyp stage, a colony of interconnected polyps in the case of Obelia, is more conspicuous than the medusas. Hydras, among the few cnidarians found in fresh water, are unusual members of class Hydrozoa in that they exist only in the polyp form. When environmental conditions are favorable, a hydra reproduces asexually by budding, the formation of outgrowths that pinch off from the parent to live independently (see FIGURE 13.1). When environmental conditions deteriorate, hydras reproduce sexually, forming resistant zygotes that remain dormant until conditions improve.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-7. The life cycle of the hydrozoan Obelia. The polyp stage is asexual, the medusa stage is sexual, and these two stages alternate, one producing the other. But do not confuse this with the alternation of generations that occurs in the plant kingdom. Both polyp and medusa are diploid organisms. (Typical of animals, only the gametes of Obelia are haploid.) By contrast, one plant generation is haploid, and the other is diploid.

Class Scyphozoa

The medusa generally prevails in the life cycle of class Scyphozoa. The medusas of most species live among the plankton as jellies. Most coastal scyphozoans go through a small polyp stage during their life cycle, but jellies that live in the open ocean generally lack the sessile polyp.

Class Anthozoa

Sea anemones and corals belong to class Anthozoa ("flower animals"). They occur only as polyps. Coral animals live as solitary or colonial forms and secrete hard external skeletons of calcium carbonate. Each polyp generation builds on the skeletal remains of earlier generations to construct "rocks" with shapes characteristic of the species. It is these skeletons that we call coral.

In tropical seas, coral reefs provide habitat for a great diversity of invertebrates and fishes. Coral reefs in many parts of the world are currently being damaged by environmental changes--global warming is one suspect. We'll examine this problem in Chapter 54.




