
 The cerebrum is the most highly evolved structure of the mammalian brain

The cerebrum develops from the embryonic telencephalon, an outgrowth of the forebrain that arose early in vertebrate evolution as a region supporting olfactory reception as well as auditory and visual centers. The cerebrum is divided into right and left cerebral hemispheres (FIGURE 48.24a). Each hemisphere consists of an outer covering of gray matter, the cerebral cortex, mentioned earlier; internal white matter; and a cluster of nuclei called basal nuclei deep within the white matter. The basal nuclei are important centers for planning and learning movement sequences. Damage in this region can cause devastating motor disorders in humans such as Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease, or even render a person passive and immobile because the nuclei no longer allow motor impulses to be sent to the muscles.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-24. Structure and functional areas of the cerebrum. (a) This rear view of the human brain shows the bilateral nature of the cerebral hemispheres. The corpus collosum (large fiber tracts connecting the hemispheres) and basal nuclei (ganglia) are completely covered (and not visible from the surface) by the convoluted gray matter of the cerebral cortex. (b) The surface of each cerebral hemisphere is divided into four lobes. (A fifth lobe, the insula, located within the fold separating the temporal and parietal lobes, is not shown in this drawing of the left hemisphere.) Specialized functions are localized in each lobe. The association areas of the left hemisphere have different functions than those of the right hemisphere.

The cerebral cortex ("gray matter") is the largest and most complex part of the mammalian brain, and the part that has changed the most during vertebrate evolution. Some of its components are also found in the brains of reptiles, which share a common ancestor with mammals (see FIGURE 34.20). Unique to mammals, however, is the neocortex, an additional outer layer of cortex consisting of six sheets of neurons running tangential to the brain surface. Among mammals, greater cognitive abilities and more sophisticated behavior are associated with the relative size of the cerebral cortex and the presence of convolutions that increase the surface area of the neocortex. Although less than 5 mm thick, the human neocortex has a surface area of about 0.5 m2 and accounts for about 80%  of the total brain mass. Nonhuman primates and cetaceans (whales and porpoises, for example) also have exceptionally large and complex neocortices. In fact, the surface area (relative to body size) of a porpoise's neocortex is second only to that of a human.

Like the rest of the cerebrum, the cerebral cortex is divided into right and left sides, each of which is responsible for the opposite half of the body. The left hemisphere receives information from, and controls the movement of, the right side of the body, and vice versa. A thick band of fibers (cerebral white matter) known as the corpus callosum communicates between the right and left cerebral hemispheres (see FIGURE 48.24a).

In the discussion of cerebral functions that follows, the words cognition and cognitive will come up often. Cognition is defined as the process of knowing, including both awareness and judgment. Thus, the cognitive functions of the brain include learning, decision making, consciousness, and an integrated sensory awareness of the surroundings.




