
 Organisms live at the expense of free energy

How can we predict what can and cannot occur in nature? How can we distinguish the possible from the impossible? We know from experience that certain events occur spontaneously and others do not. For instance, we know that water flows downhill, that objects of opposite charge move toward each other, that an ice cube melts at room temperature, and that a sugar cube dissolves in water. Explaining why these processes occur spontaneously is tricky.

Let's begin by defining a spontaneous process as a change that can occur without outside help. A spontaneous change can be harnessed to perform work. The downhill flow of water can be used to turn a turbine in a power plant, for example. A process that cannot occur on its own is said to be nonspontaneous; it will happen only if energy is added to the system. Water moves uphill only when a windmill or some other machine pumps the water against gravity, and a cell must expend energy to synthesize a protein from amino acids.

When a spontaneous process occurs in a system, the stability of that system increases. Unstable systems tend to change in such a way that they become more stable. A body of elevated water, such as a reservoir, is less stable than the same water at sea level. A system of charged particles is less stable when opposite charges are apart than when they are together. A compressed spring is less stable than a relaxed one. In all of these examples, the system moves toward greater stability when nothing prevents such a change: The water falls, the opposite charges come together, the spring relaxes. In situations less familiar to us, how can we predict which changes lead to greater stability in a system--that is, which changes are spontaneous? You have already learned that a process can occur spontaneously only if it increases the disorder (entropy) of the universe. This principle is helpful in theory, but it does not give us a practical criterion to apply to biological systems because it requires that we measure changes in both the system and the surroundings. We need some standard for spontaneity that is based on the system alone. That criterion is called free energy.

Free Energy: A Criterion for Spontaneous Change

The concept of free energy is not easy to grasp, but the effort is worthwhile because we can apply the idea to many biological problems. Free energy is the portion of a system's energy that can perform work when temperature is uniform throughout the system, as in a living cell. It is called free energy because it is available for work, not because it can be spent without cost to the universe. In fact, you will soon understand that organisms can live only at the expense of free energy acquired from the surroundings. FIGURE 6.5 illustrates the relationship of free energy to spontaneity, stability, and work.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 6-5. The relationship of free energy to stability, work capacity, and spontaneous change. Unstable systems (top diagrams) are rich in free energy. They have a tendency to change spontaneously to a more stable state (bottom), and it is possible to harness this "downhill" change to perform work. (a) In this case, free energy is proportional to the girl's altitude. (b) The free-energy concept also applies on the molecular scale, in this case to the movement of molecules known as diffusion. Here, molecules of a solute are distributed unequally across a membrane separating two aqueous compartments. This ordered state is unstable; it is rich in free energy. If the solute molecules can cross the membrane, there will be a net movement (diffusion) of the molecules until they are equally concentrated in the two compartments. (c) Chemical reactions also involve free energy. The sugar molecule on top is less stable than the simpler molecules below. When catabolic pathways break down complex organic molecules, a cell can perform work using the free energy that was stored in the more complex molecules.

A system's quantity of free energy is symbolized by the letter G. There are two components to G: the system's total energy (symbolized by H) and its entropy (symbolized by S). Free energy is related to these factors in the following way: 

where T stands for absolute temperature in Kelvin (K) units (K = &#176;C +273; see Appendix 2). Notice that temperature amplifies the entropy term of the equation. This makes sense if you remember that temperature measures the intensity of random molecular motion (heat), which tends to disrupt order. What does this equation tell us about free energy? Not all the energy stored in a system (H) is available for work. The system's disorder, the entropy factor, is subtracted from total energy in computing the maximum capacity of the system to perform useful work. We are then left with free energy, which is somewhat less than the system's total energy.

How does the concept of free energy help us determine whether a particular process can occur spontaneously? Think of free energy G as a measure of a system's instability--its tendency to change to a more stable state. Systems that are rich in energy, such as compressed springs or separated charges, are unstable; so are highly ordered systems, such as complex molecules. In other words, systems that tend to change spontaneously to a more stable state have high energy, low entropy, or both. The free-energy equation weighs these two factors, which are consolidated in the system's G content. Now we can state a versatile criterion for spontaneous change: In any spontaneous process, the free energy of a system decreases.

The change in free energy as a system goes from a starting state to a different state is represented by DG: 

Or, put another way:  For a process to occur spontaneously, the system must either give up energy (a decrease in H), give up order (an increase in S), or both. When these changes in H and S are tallied, DG must have a negative value (DG &lt; 0). The greater this decrease in free energy, the greater the maximum amount of work the spontaneous process can perform. This is a formal, mathematical way of stating the obvious: Nature runs "downhill" in the sense of a loss in useful energy, the capacity to perform work.

Free Energy and Equilibrium

Another term for a state of maximum stability is equilibrium, which you learned about in Chapter 2 in connection with chemical reactions. There is an important relationship between free energy and equilibrium, including chemical equilibrium. Recall that most chemical reactions are reversible and proceed until the forward and backward reactions occur at the same rate. The reaction is then said to be at chemical equilibrium, and there is no further change in the concentration of products or reactants. As a reaction proceeds toward equilibrium, the free energy of the mixture of reactants and products decreases. Free energy increases when a reaction is somehow pushed away from equilibrium. For a reaction at equilibrium, DG = 0, because there is no net change in the system. We can think of equilibrium as an energy valley. A chemical reaction or physical process at equilibrium performs no work. A process is spontaneous and can perform work when sliding toward equilibrium. Movement away from equilibrium is nonspontaneous; it can occur only with the help of an outside energy source. We can now apply the free-energy concept more specifically to the chemistry of life.

Free Energy and Metabolism

Exergonic and Endergonic Reactions in Metabolism. Based on their free-energy changes, chemical reactions can be classified as either exergonic ("energy outward") or endergonic ("energy inward"). An exergonic reaction proceeds with a net release of free energy (FIGURE 6.6a). Because the chemical mixture loses free energy, DG is negative for an exergonic reaction. In other words, exergonic reactions are those that occur spontaneously. The magnitude of DG for an exergonic reaction is the maximum amount of work the reaction can perform. We can use the overall reaction for cellular respiration as an example: 



Click image to enlarge



Fig 6-6. Energy changes in exergonic and endergonic reactions.

For each mole (180 g) of glucose broken down by respiration, 686 kcal (or 2,870 kJ) of energy are made available for work (under what scientists call standard conditions). Because energy must be conserved, the chemical products of respiration store 686 kcal less free energy than the reactants. The products are, in a sense, the spent exhaust of a process that tapped most of the free energy stored in the sugar molecules.

An endergonic reaction is one that absorbs free energy from its surroundings (FIGURE 6.6b). Because this kind of reaction stores free energy in molecules, DG is positive. Such reactions are nonspontaneous, and the magnitude of DG is the quantity of energy required to drive the reaction. If a chemical process is exergonic (downhill) in one direction, then the reverse process must be endergonic (uphill). A reversible process cannot be downhill in both directions. If DG = - 686 kcal/mol for respiration, then for photosynthesis to produce sugar from carbon dioxide and water, DG = +686 kcal/mol. Sugar production in the leaf cells of a plant is steeply endergonic, an uphill process powered by the absorption of light energy.

Metabolic Disequilibrium. Reactions in a closed system eventually reach equilibrium and can do no work, as illustrated by the closed hydroelectric system in FIGURE 6.7a. The chemical reactions of metabolism are reversible, and they, too, would reach equilibrium if they occurred in the isolation of a test tube. Because systems at equilibrium have a DG of zero and can do no work, a cell that has reached metabolic equilibrium is dead! In fact, metabolic disequilibrium is one of the defining features of life.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 6-7. Disequilibrium and work in closed and open systems.

A cell can maintain disequilibrium because it is an open system. The constant flow of materials in and out of the cell keeps the metabolic pathways from ever reaching equilibrium, and the cell continues to do work throughout its life. This principle is illustrated by the open (and more realistic) hydroelectric system in FIGURE 6.7b. However, unlike this simple single-step system, a catabolic pathway in a cell releases free energy in a series of reactions. An example is cellular respiration, illustrated by analogy in FIGURE 6.7c. Some of the reversible reactions of respiration are constantly "pulled" in one direction--that is, they are kept out of equilibrium. The key to sustaining this disequilibrium is that the product of one reaction does not accumulate, but instead becomes a reactant in the next step. The overall sequence of reactions is kept going by the huge free-energy difference between glucose at the "uphill" end of the pathway and carbon dioxide and water at the "downhill" end. As long as the cell has a steady supply of glucose or other fuels and is able to expel waste products to the surroundings, its metabolic pathways never reach equilibrium and continue to do the work of life.

We see once again how important it is to think of organisms as open systems. Sunlight provides a daily source of free energy for an ecosystem's plants and other photosynthetic organisms. Animals and other nonphotosynthetic organisms in an ecosystem depend on free-energy transfusions in the form of the organic products of photosynthesis.

Now that we have applied the free-energy concept to metabolism, we are ready to see how a cell actually performs the work of life. A key feature of bioenergetics is energy coupling, the use of an exergonic process to drive an endergonic one. A molecule called ATP is responsible for mediating most energy coupling in cells.




