
 RNA may have been the first genetic material

Life is defined partly by the process of inheritance, which is based on self-replicating molecules. Today's cells store their genetic information as DNA. They transcribe the information into RNA and then translate RNA messages into specific enzymes and other proteins (see Chapter 17). This mechanism of information flow probably emerged gradually through a series of refinements to much simpler processes. In fact, many researchers now favor the hypothesis that the first hereditary material was not DNA, but RNA, which may also have functioned as the first enzymes. (This helps resolve the "chicken and egg" paradox of which came first, genes or enzymes.) According to this hypothesis, the molecular biology of today was preceded by an "RNA world."

Molecular Replication in an RNA World

Several scientists have tested the hypothesis of RNA self-replication. Short polymers of ribonucleotides have been produced abiotically in laboratory experiments. If such RNA is added to a solution containing monomers for making more RNA, sequences about five to ten nucleotides long are copied from the template according to the base-pairing rules (FIGURE 26.11). If zinc is added as a catalyst, sequences up to 40 nucleotides long are copied with less than 1%  error.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 26-11. Abiotic replication of RNA.

In the 1980s, Thomas Cech revolutionized thinking about the evolution of life when he discovered that RNA molecules are important catalysts in modern cells. This finding disproved the long-held view that only proteins (enzymes) serve as biological catalysts. Cech and other researchers found that modern cells use RNA catalysts, called ribozymes, to remove introns from RNA (see Chapter 17). Ribozymes also help catalyze the synthesis of new RNA, notably rRNA, tRNA, and mRNA. Thus, RNA is autocatalytic, and in the prebiotic world, before there were enzymes (proteins) or DNA, RNA molecules may have been fully capable of ribozyme-catalyzed replication.

Natural Selection in an RNA World

Natural selection on the molecular level has been observed operating on RNA populations in the laboratory. Unlike double-stranded DNA, which takes the form of a uniform helix, single-stranded RNA molecules assume a variety of specific three-dimensional shapes mandated by their nucleotide sequences. The molecule thus has both a genotype (its nucleotide sequence) and a phenotype (its conformation, which interacts with surrounding molecules in specific ways). In a particular environment, RNA molecules of certain base sequences are more stable and replicate faster and with fewer errors than other sequences. Beginning with a diversity of RNA molecules that must compete for monomers to replicate, the sequence best suited to the temperature, salt concentration, and other features of the surrounding solution and having the greatest autocatalytic activity will prevail. Its descendants will not be a single RNA species but will be a family of closely related sequences because of copying errors. Selection screens mutations in the original sequence, and occasionally a copying error results in a molecule that folds into a shape that is even more stable or more adept at self-replication than the ancestral sequence. Similar selection events may have occurred in the prebiotic RNA world.

The rudiments of RNA-directed protein synthesis may have been the weak binding of specific amino acids to bases along RNA molecules, which functioned as simple templates holding a few amino acids together long enough for them to be linked. (Indeed, this is one function of rRNA in modern ribosomes.) If RNA happened to synthesize a short polypeptide that in turn behaved as an enzyme helping the RNA molecule to replicate, then the early chemical dynamics included molecular cooperation as well as competition. These first steps toward the replication and translation of genetic information may have been taken by molecular evolution even before RNA and polypeptides became packaged within membranes.




