
 Sympatric speciation: A new species can originate in the geographic midst of the parent species

In sympatric speciation, new species arise within the range of parent populations rather than in geographically separate populations (see FIGURE 24.6b). How can reproductive barriers between sympatric populations evolve? Let's examine examples in both the plant and animal kingdoms.

Polyploid Speciation in Plants

Some plant species have their origins in accidents during cell division that result in extra sets of chromosomes, a mutant condition called polyploidy. An autopolyploid (from the Greek autos, self) is an individual that has more than two chromosome sets, all derived from a single species. For example, a failure of meiosis during gamete production can double chromosome number from the diploid count (2n) to a tetraploid number (4n) (FIGURE 24.13). The tetraploid can then fertilize itself (self-pollinate) or mate with other tetraploids. However, the mutants cannot interbreed successfully with diploid plants of the original population; the offspring, which would be triploid (3n), would be sterile because unpaired chromosomes result in abnormal meiosis. In just one generation, a postzygotic barrier has caused reproductive isolation and has interrupted gene flow between a tiny population of tetraploids (maybe only a single plant initially) and the parent diploid population that surrounds it. Sympatric speciation by autopolyploidy was first discovered in the early 1900s by geneticist Hugo de Vries when his experiments produced a new species of evening primrose (FIGURE 24.14, p. 474).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 24-13. Sympatric speciation by autopolyploidy in plants.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 24-14. Botanist Hugo de Vries and his new primrose species. Working in the early 1900s, de Vries studied variation in evening primroses. In his breeding experiments with Oenothera lamarckiana (lower left), a diploid species of primrose with 14 chromosomes, he produced a new variety with 28 chromosomes. It was a tetraploid, which could not interbreed with its parent species. De Vries named the new primrose species Oenothera gigas, for its large size (upper right).

Another type of polyploid species, much more common than autopolyploids, is called an allopolyploid, referring to the contribution of two different species to a polyploid hybrid. The origin of an allopolyploid begins when two different species interbreed and combine their chromosomes. Interspecific hybrids are usually sterile because the haploid set of chromosomes from one species cannot pair during meiosis with the haploid set from the other species. Though infertile, a hybrid may actually be more vigorous than its parents and propagate itself asexually (which many plants can do). Various mechanisms can then change a sterile hybrid into a fertile polyploid (FIGURE 24.15 on p. 474 illustrates one such mechanism). The polyploid hybrids are fertile with each other but cannot interbreed with either parental species.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 24-15. One mechanism for allopolyploid speciation in plants. A hybrid between two species is normally sterile because its chromosomes are not homologous and cannot pair during meiosis. However, the hybrids may be able to reproduce asexually. This diagram traces one mechanism that can produce fertile hybrids as new polyploid species. The new species has a chromosome number equal to the sum of the chromosomes in the two parent species.

The origin of new polyploid plant species is common enough and rapid enough that scientists have documented several such speciations. For example, two new species of plants called goatsbeards originated in the Pacific Northwest in the mid-1900s. The goatsbeard genus, Tragopogon, is native to Europe, but three species were introduced by humans to the Americas in the early 1900s. These species, T. dubius, T. pratensis, and T. porrifolius, are now common weeds in urban wastelands such as abandoned parking lots. In the 1950s, botanists identified two new species of Tragopogon in regions of Idaho and eastern Washington where all three European species are also found. One new species, T. miscellus, is a tetraploid hybrid of T. dubius and T. pratensis; the other new species, T. mirus, is also an allopolyploid, but its ancestors are T. dubius and T. porrifolius. While the T. mirus population grows mainly by reproduction of its own members, additional episodes of hybridization between the ancestral species also add to the T. mirus population. This is an ongoing speciation process we can observe today.

Many of the plants we grow for food are polyploids. Oats, cotton, potatoes, tobacco, and wheat are among the polyploid species important to agriculture. The wheat used for bread, Triticum aestivum, is an allopolyploid that probably originated about 8,000 years ago as a spontaneous hybrid of a cultivated wheat and a wild grass. Plant geneticists now hybridize plants and use chemicals that induce meiotic and mitotic errors to help create new polyploids with special qualities. For example, artificial hybrids combine the high yield of wheat with the ability of rye to resist disease.

Sympatric Speciation in Animals

Although polyploid speciation is less common in animals than in plants, it does occur. However, there are other mechanisms that can lead to sympatric speciation in animals. For example, animals may become reproductively isolated within the geographic range of a parent population if genetic factors cause them to become dependent on resources not used by the parent population. Consider, for example, the wasps that pollinate figs. Each fig species is pollinated by a particular species of wasp, which mates and lays its eggs in the figs. A genetic change that caused wasps to select a different fig species would segregate mating individuals of this new phenotype from the parent population. This would set the stage for further evolutionary divergence.

One of Earth's hot spots of animal speciation is Lake Victoria, in East Africa. The lake, which is less than a million years old, is home to almost 200 species of closely related fishes belonging to the cichlid family. The subdivision of populations into groups specialized for exploiting different food sources and other resources in the lake is one process that probably contributed to the adaptive radiation of these fishes. But in at least some cases, nonrandom mating, in which females select males having a certain appearance, was probably a key factor in the sympatric speciation of cichlids. Consider two closely related sympatric species of cichlids that differ mainly in coloration: Pundamilia pundamilia has a blue back, and Pundamilia nyererei has a red back. It is a reasonable hypothesis that a preference for mates of like coloration functions as a behavioral barrier to interbreeding between the two species. In 1998, biologists from Holland's University of Leiden published experiments testing this hypothesis (FIGURE 24.16). In an aquarium with natural light, females of each species mated only with males of their own species. But in an aquarium illuminated with a monochromatic orange lamp, which makes the two cichlid species appear identical in color, females of each species mated indiscriminately with males of both species. The hybrids from the errant P. pundamilia &#160;X&#160; P. nyererei matings were viable and fertile. We can infer that mate choice based on coloration is the main reproductive barrier that normally keeps the gene pools of these two species separate. And we can also infer, since the genetic divergence is small enough that the species can still interbreed when the prezygotic barrier is breached, that speciation occurred relatively recently. Perhaps the ancestral population was polymorphic for coloration and divergence began with mate choice by two subsets of females preferring one or the other color of male. Sexual selection would then reinforce the color difference as females mated preferentially with males having genes for the least mistakable coloration (see Chapter 23 to review sexual selection).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 24-16. Mate choice in two species of Lake Victoria cichlids. (a) In normal lighting, two sympatric species of the cichlid genus Pundamilia are noticeably different in coloration. Females of each species mate only with males of their own species. (b) With monochromatic lighting in laboratory experiments, females apparently cannot distinguish males of the two species and mate indiscriminately, producing fertile hybrids.

Summary of Sympatric Speciation

Sympatric speciation requires the emergence of some type of reproductive barrier that isolates the gene pool of a subset of a population without geographic separation from the parent population. In plants, the mechanism that is best understood is hybridization between closely related species coupled with errors during cell division that lead to polyploid individuals that are fertile. In animals, sympatric speciation can result from some subset of a population becoming reproductively isolated because of a switch to a habitat, food source, or other resource not used by the parent population (speciation in fig-eating flies is an example); or it can result from the emergence of a rigid mating preference by females for specific male forms in a polymorphic population (as in our example of cichlid speciation).




