
 Combustion of fossil fuels is the main cause of acid precipitation

The burning of wood and the combustion of coal and other fossil fuels release oxides of sulfur and nitrogen that react with water in the atmosphere to form sulfuric and nitric acid, respectively. The acids eventually fall back to Earth's surface as acid precipitation. Acid precipitation is defined as rain, snow, or fog that has a pH less than 5.6 (see FIGURE 3.9). It lowers the pH of aquatic ecosystems and affects the soil chemistry of terrestrial ecosystems.

Although acid precipitation due to fuel combustion has been occurring ever since the Industrial Revolution, emissions have increased during the past hundred years, mainly as a result of ore smelters and electrical generating plants. Ecologists first brought the environmental impact of acid precipitation to public attention in the 1960s, when they began to document damage to forests and lakes in Europe and eastern North America. It is clearly a regional or even a global problem, not a local one. To counter local pollution problems, smelters and generating plants are built with very tall exhaust stacks (over 300 m high). This reduces pollution at ground level, but exports the problem far downwind. The nitrogenous and sulfurous pollutants from fuel combustion can drift hundreds of kilometers before falling as acid precipitation. Ecologists began to realize that lakes in eastern Canada were dying because of air pollution from factories in the midwest. Lakes in southern Norway were losing fish because of acid rain from pollutants generated in Great Britain. By 1980, precipitation in large areas of Europe and North America averaged pH 4.0-4.5, with "record" storms occasionally dropping rain as acidic as pH 3.0 (FIGURE 54.23).

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 54-23. Distribution of acid precipitation in North America and Europe. (a) In these maps of North America and Europe with 1980 data superimposed, the numbers such as 10&#160;X&#160; identify the acidity of precipitation in those areas compared to a normal rainwater pH of 5.6. In an area marked 10&#160;X&#160;, precipitation was, on average, ten times more acidic than normal (which means the pH in those areas averaged 4.6). Other areas had precipitation 20&#160;X&#160; or 30&#160;X&#160; the normal rainfall acidity. (b) This U.S. map profiles pH averages for precipitation in 1999.

In terrestrial ecosystems, such as the deciduous forests of New England, the change in soil pH due to acid precipitation causes calcium and other nutrients to leach from the soil. The nutrient deficiencies affect the health of plants and limit their growth.

Freshwater ecosystems are particularly sensitive to acid precipitation. The lakes in North America and northern Europe that are most readily damaged by acid precipitation are those underlain by granite bedrock. Such lakes generally have relatively poor buffering capacity because the water is "soft," meaning the concentration of bicarbonate, an important buffer, is low. Fish populations have declined in thousands of such lakes in Norway and Sweden, where the pH of the water has dropped below 5.0. In Canada, newly hatched lake trout die when the pH drops below 5.4. Lake trout are keystone predators in many Canadian lakes, and when they are replaced by acid-tolerant fish such as yellow perch, the dynamics of food webs change dramatically (see FIGURE 53.14 to review keystone predators).

Environmental regulations and new industrial technologies have enabled many developed countries, including the United States, to reduce sulfur dioxide emissions during the past 30 years. In the United States, for example, sulfur dioxide emissions were reduced 25%  between 1990 and 1996. The water chemistry in the streams and freshwater lakes of New England is slowly improving after decades of severe acid precipitation. However, ecologists estimate that it will take another 10 to 20 years for these ecosystems to recover, even if sulfur dioxide emissions continue to decrease.




