
 Regions of the cerebrum are specialized for different functions

Each side of the cerebral cortex is customarily described as having four lobes, called the frontal, temporal, occipital, and parietal lobes. Researchers have identified a number of functional areas within each lobe (FIGURE 48.24b). These areas include primary sensory areas for input of different kinds of sensory information, and association areas that integrate the input with information from other parts of the brain.

Two functional cortical areas, the primary motor cortex and the primary somatosensory cortex, form the boundary between the frontal lobe and the parietal lobe. The motor cortex functions mainly in sending commands to the skeletal muscles, signaling appropriate responses to any sensory stimuli. The somatosensory cortex receives and partially integrates signals from touch, pain, pressure, and temperature receptors throughout the body. The proportion of motor or somatosensory cortex devoted to a particular part of the body is correlated with the relative importance of sensory or motor information for that part of the body (FIGURE 48.25).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-25. Primary motor and somatosensory areas of the human cerebral cortex. In these cross-sectional maps of the cortex, the surface area devoted to each body part is symbolized by the relative sizes of the body parts in the cartoon.

Integrative Function of the Association Areas

Sensory information coming into the cortex, mainly via the thalamus, is first directed to primary sensory areas within the lobes: visual information to the occipital lobe; auditory input to the temporal lobe; and somatosensory information about touch, pain, pressure, temperature, and the position of muscles and limbs to the parietal lobe (see FIGURE 48.24b). Information about taste goes to a separate sensory region of the parietal lobe. Olfactory information is sent first to "primitive" regions of the cortex and then via the thalamus to an interior region of the frontal lobe (by "primitive" regions here, we mean cerebral regions that are similar between mammals and reptiles). All this information is then passed to the adjacent association areas, which integrate ("associate") the input from different types of senses, assess the significance of the overall sensory input, and then transmit signals to still more association areas, these located in the frontal lobes. The association regions of the frontal lobes then compose an appropriate motor response plan, which is used by the primary motor cortex to direct the movement of skeletal muscles.

The major increase in the size of the neocortex that occurred during mammalian evolution expanded the association areas that integrate higher cognitive functions that make more complex behavior and learning possible. The cortical surface of a rat's brain is relatively smooth and is occupied mainly by primary sensory areas, which receive direct input from sensory receptors. In contrast, the cortical surface of our brains is much more convoluted and consists mainly of association regions. Regional specializations in this association cortex first appear during brain development as infants and children learn routines for sensing and acting. While these regional specializations are roughly the same in different humans, damage to one brain area early in development can frequently cause redirection of its normal functions to other areas. Perhaps the most dramatic example of this is observed in some human infants with intractable epilepsy who are treated by removing the entire right or left cerebral hemisphere. Amazingly, the remaining hemisphere takes over most of the functions normally provided by two hemispheres. Some plasticity is maintained in adult brains, for they can sometimes recover from damage to a portion of the cerebral cortex by developing or using new circuits.

Lateralization of Brain Function

During an infant's or child's brain development, competing functions segregate and displace each other into the cortex of opposite cerebral hemispheres. The left hemisphere becomes most adept at language, math, logic operations, and the processing of serial sequences of information. It has a bias for the detailed, speed-optimized activities required for skeletal motor control and processing of fine visual and auditory details. The right hemisphere is stronger at pattern recognition, face recognition, spatial relations, nonverbal ideation, emotional processing in general, and parallel processing of many kinds of information. Understanding and generating the stress and intonation patterns of speech that convey its emotional content emphasizes right-hemisphere function, as does music. The right hemisphere appears to specialize in perception of the relationship between images and the whole context in which they occur, whereas the left hemisphere is better at focused perception. While working with their hands, most right-handed people use the left hand (right hemisphere) for context or holding and use the right hand (left hemisphere) for fine detailed movement.

Language and Speech

The systematic and detailed mapping of higher cognitive functions to specific brain areas began in the 19th century when physicians performed post-mortem examinations of the brains of patients with language impairments. Those who could understand language but not speak usually had damage to a frontal lobe area, now called Broca's area, just in front of motor cortex controlling face and lips. Studies of brain activity using a modern imaging technology called PET (for positron emission tomography) have confirmed that Broca's area is active during generation of speech (FIGURE 48.26, lower left image). Autopsies during the 19th century also suggested that damage to a posterior portion of the temporal lobe, now called Wernicke's area (upper left image of FIGURE 48.26), could abolish the ability to comprehend speech but leave speech generation intact.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-26. Mapping language areas of the cerebral cortex. A modern imaging technology called PET scanning maps regions of an organ that are most metabolically active. These four computer-generated brain maps show "hot spots" of activity in the brain of one individual under four different conditions, all related to speech.

More detailed modern studies, both of brain lesions and imaging of brain activity, have now demonstrated that language is processed by multiple areas in the cortex. An instruction to simply read a printed word out loud activates the visual cortex (upper right image of FIGURE 48.26) and Broca's area. Frontal and temporal areas become active when meaning must be attached to words, as in generating verbs to go with nouns or in grouping together related words or concepts (FIGURE 48.26, lower right image). Researchers can monitor the effect of practice on this cognitive development. An instruction to associate a verb with each noun projected on a screen initially activates frontal lobes. But after 15 minutes of practice, the activation has contracted mainly to those areas used in simply reading a word out loud. This illustrates an important principle of brain function: novel stimuli or instructions cause the greatest mobilization of brain areas and resources. Once a situation or procedure has become familiar, it is accommodated by a much lower level of brain activity.

Emotions

Two components of the cerebral cortex, the hippocampus and the olfactory cortex, are common to reptiles and mammals. In mammals, these structures, together with some inner portions of the cortex's lobes and sections of the thalamus and hypothalamus, form a ring around the brainstem called the limbic system (FIGURE 48.27, p. 1050). By interacting with sensory areas of the neocortex and other higher brain centers, the limbic system generates the feelings we generally call emotions.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-27. The limbic system. Portions of the diencephalon (thalamus and hypothalamus) and inner parts of the cerebral cortex, including the amygdala and hippocampus, make up this functional center of human emotions and memory. Signals from the nose enter the brain through the olfactory bulb, which is part of the limbic system. Other sensory information enters the limbic system via other parts of the cerebral cortex (arrows). A "higher" center of integration in the cerebrum, the prefrontal cortex, apparently consults the limbic system and other brain centers in processing and retrieving memories and may use memories to modify behavior.

The limbic system is central to some of the behaviors, such as the extended nurturing of infants and an emotional bonding to other individuals, that distinguish mammals from most reptiles and amphibians. The limbic system mediates primary emotions that manifest in such behaviors as laughing and crying. But the system also attaches emotional "feelings" to basic survival-related programs of the brainstem, such as feeding, aggression, and sexuality.

Structures of the emotional brain centered in the limbic system form early in development, and provide a foundation for the higher cognitive functions that appear later during the development of neocortical areas. We, along with other primates, are born with emotional brain circuits prepared to support bonding to a caretaker, to recognize the crude elements of a human face, to have visual and vocal interactions with that caretaker, and to express fear, distress and anger. Learning and memory processes are then set in motion to build a history of what sensing and motor actions "work" in obtaining warmth and food. We also begin very early to distinguish "right" from "wrong"--for example, by causing happy or angry facial or vocal expressions from a caretaker. The amygdala, a nucleus in the temporal lobe (see FIGURE 48.27), is central in recognizing the emotional content of facial expressions and laying down emotional memories.

This emotional memory system seems to appear earlier in development than the system that supports explicit recall of events, which requires another limbic structure, the hippocampus. Adults who learn to avoid an aversive situation, such as a picture that is always followed by a mild electric shock, remember the picture and experience autonomic arousal--as measured by heart rate increase or sweating--if the picture is presented again. Some adults with damage to the hippocampus report that they do not recognize the picture, but the autonomic arousal mediated by the amygdala still occurs, for the emotional memory mediated by this structure is still intact. Conversely, other patients with damage just to the amygdala do not exhibit the autonomic reactions but recall the picture, because the hippocampus which is involved in explicit memory is functioning.

As children develop, primary emotions such as pleasure and fear are associated with different situations in a process that requires portions of the neocortex, especially the frontal lobes. The existence of learning processes by which we accumulate emotional reactions to different situations are revealed by their disruption in some patients who have lesions or tumors in their frontal lobes. Their behavior is superficially normal most of the time--intellect and memory seem intact--but motivation, foresight, goal formation, and decision making are flawed. These patients are subject to bursts of immodest, impolite, or other inappropriate behaviors; they act almost as though their free will had been taken from them. Their emotions and feelings also are diminished. Frontal lobotomies, which disrupt the connection between the frontal lobes and the limbic system, were once performed widely to treat severe emotional disorders. However, the resulting docility was usually accompanied by a loss of the ability to concentrate, plan, and work toward goals, and thus drug therapy has replaced lobotomy for treating such severely ill individuals.

Memory and Learning

Our daily life is a constant checking of what is happening right now against what just happened a few moments ago. We hold information, anticipations, or goals for a time in short-term memory locations in the frontal lobes and then release them if they become irrelevant. Should we wish to retain knowledge of a face or a phone number, the mechanisms of long-term memory are activated in a process that requires the hippocampus, part of the limbic system (see FIGURE 48.27). If we later need to remember a name or number, we can fetch it from that long-term memory and place it back in our working memory. The transfer of information from short-term to long-term memory is enhanced by rehearsal ("practice makes perfect"), positive or negative emotional states mediated by the amygdala, and the association of new data with data previously learned and stored in long-term memory (it's easier to learn a new card game if you already have "card sense" from playing other games).

Many sensory and motor association areas of the cerebral cortex outside the classical language areas are involved in storing and retrieving words and images from our mental dictionary. Studies of patients with brain lesions and imaging studies on unimpaired patients suggest, for example, that knowledge of unique persons is associated with the anterior portion of the left temporal lobe, knowledge of animals with activity in the middle lower part of this lobe, and knowledge of tools with the lower posterior part.

The memorization of phone numbers, facts, and places--which can be very rapid and may require only one exposure to the relevant item--may rely mainly on rapid changes in the strength of existing nerve connections. In contrast, the slow learning and remembering of skills and procedures, such as a person's experience when trying to improve his or her tennis game, appear to involve cellular mechanisms very similar to those responsible for brain growth and development. Nerve cells actually make new connections. Skill memories usually involve motor activities that are learned by repetition without consciously remembering specific information. You perform learned motor skills, such as walking, tying your shoes, riding a bicycle, or writing without consciously recalling the individual steps required to do these tasks correctly. Once a skill memory is learned, it is difficult to unlearn. For example, a person who has played tennis for years with a self-taught, awkward backhand has a much tougher time learning the correct form than a beginner just learning the game. Bad habits, as we know, are difficult to break.

Many exciting new experiments are documenting changes in gene expression and synaptic molecules that correlate with memory formation. Functional changes at certain synapses in the hippocampus and amygdala seem to be directly related to memory storage and emotional conditioning. One kind of change, called long-term depression (LTD), is decreased responsiveness to an action potential by a postsynaptic cell. LTD is induced by repeated, weak stimulation. A second kind of synaptic change, called long-term potentiation (LTP), is an enhanced responsiveness to action potentials by a postsynaptic cell. It can result when a presynaptic cell bombards a synapse with a series of brief, repeated action potentials that strongly depolarize the postsynaptic membrane. With LTP established, a single action potential from the presynaptic cell has a much greater effect at the synapse than before. Lasting for a matter of hours, days, or weeks, depending on the number and frequency of repeated action potentials, LTP may be what happens when a memory is being stored or when learning takes place. LTP is associated with the release of the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate by the presynaptic cell. Glutamate binds with a specific class of receptors in the postsynaptic membrane, opening gated channels that are highly permeable to calcium ions (Ca2+). In turn, the Ca2+ triggers a cascade of enzyme activity in the postsynaptic cell, making it more responsive to stimulation.

Human Consciousness

When we use the word consciousness, we are usually referring to our own human version of self-consciousness, in which we experience ourselves as not only sensing, acting, and feeling in the present moment but also thinking about the past and the future. How many of these capabilities extend to other animals is a subject of a vigorous debate (see Chapter 51). Until relatively recently the study of human consciousness has been considered outside the province of hard science, more appropriate as a subject for philosophy and religion. This situation is changing as we learn more about the brain activities that underlie our behaviors. Brain imaging studies are showing changes in neuronal activity that correlate with conscious perceptual choices, unconscious versus conscious processing, retrieval of memories, and engaging working memory to plan for the future. There is a growing consensus that consciousness is an emergent property of the brain that recruits activities in many areas of the cortex. Several models suggest a scanning mechanism that repetitively sweeps across the brain to unite many of these disparate processes into a unified conscious moment. Rather than just being a matter of describing the details of how the areas described above are put together, approaching consciousness may also require the understanding of dynamic whole-brain patterns of activity that bear no more direct relationship to individual nerve cells than do hurricanes to their constituent water molecules.

Understanding whole-brain phenomena such as consciousness represents one end of the spectrum of questions about nervous systems. At the other (microscopic) end is a frontier where neuroscientists are studying how neurons develop and organize into networks.




