
 The history of life is punctuated by mass extinctions

The fossil record reveals an episodic history, with long, relatively quiescent periods punctuated by briefer intervals when the turnover in species composition was much more extensive. These biological upheavals were times of mass extinctions followed by extensive diversification of certain taxonomic groups that escaped extinction. We will emphasize episodes of radiation of biological diversity in the next unit of chapters. Here we examine some examples of mass extinctions.

A species may become extinct because its habitat has been destroyed or because the environment has changed in a direction unfavorable to the species. If ocean temperatures fall by even a few degrees, many species that are otherwise beautifully adapted will perish. Even if physical factors in the environment are stable, biological factors may change; the environment in which a species lives includes the other organisms that live there, and evolutionary change in one species is likely to have some impact on other species in the community. For example, the evolution by some Cambrian animals of hard body parts, such as jaws and shells, may have made some organisms lacking hard parts more vulnerable to predation and thereby more prone to extinction.

Extinction is in fact inevitable in a changing world, and there have been crises in the history of life when global environmental changes have been so rapid and disruptive that a majority of species were swept away. Mass extinctions are known primarily from the decimation of hard-bodied animals that lived in shallow seas, the organisms for which the fossil record is most complete. The fossil record chronicles a number of mass extinctions, with five to seven of them particularly extensive. The two that have received the most attention are the Permian mass extinction, which occurred about 250 million years ago, and the Cretaceous mass extinction of about 65 million years ago.

The Permian mass extinction, which defines the boundary between the Paleozoic and Mesozoic eras, claimed about 90%  of the species of marine animals. Terrestrial life also crashed; for example, 8 out of 27 orders of Permian insects did not survive into the Triassic, the next geologic period. This mass extinction occurred in less than 5 million years--possibly much less--an instant in the context of geologic time.

Several factors may have combined to cause radical environmental change during the late Permian. That was about the time the continents merged to form Pangaea, which disturbed many marine and terrestrial habitats and altered climate. Massive volcanic eruptions also occurred in what is now Siberia, constituting the most extreme episode of volcanism of the past half-billion years. Besides spewing lava and ash into the atmosphere, the Siberian volcanoes may have produced enough carbon dioxide to warm the global climate. Reduced temperature differences between the equator and the poles would have slowed the mixing of ocean water, which in turn would have reduced the amounts of oxygen available to marine organisms. An oxygen deficit in the oceans may have played a large role in the Permian extinctions.

The Cretaceous mass extinction of 65 million years ago delineates the boundary between the Mesozoic and Cenozoic eras (FIGURE 25.5). That debacle doomed more than half the marine species and exterminated many families of terrestrial plants and animals, including the dinosaurs. The climate became cooler at that time, and shallow seas receded from continental lowlands. Large volcanic eruptions in what is now India may have contributed to the cooling by releasing material into the atmosphere that blocked sunlight. However, many scientists now favor the so-called impact hypothesis, which postulates that the main cause of the Cretaceous extinctions was a collision of an asteroid or large comet with Earth. Separating Mesozoic from Cenozoic sediments is a thin layer of clay enriched in iridium, an element very rare on Earth but common in meteorites and other extraterrestrial debris that occasionally fall to Earth. Walter and Luis Alvarez and their colleagues at the University of California, Berkeley, studied the clay and suggested that it is fallout from a huge cloud of debris that billowed into the atmosphere when an asteroid hit Earth. The Alvarezes proposed that the great cloud would have blocked sunlight and severely disturbed climate for several months.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 25-5. Diversity of life and periods of mass extinction. This graph, based on the fossil record of terrestrial and marine organisms, reveals a general increase in the diversity of organisms over time (red line and right vertical axis). Mass extinctions on land and in the oceans interrupted the buildup of diversity during many periods of geologic time (blue line and left vertical axis). In this figure, extinction events are estimated as percentages of taxonomic families that died out relative to the number extant in each period of geologic time. Of the two mass extinction periods labeled in the figure, the Permian mass extinction claimed more than 90%  of species on land and in the seas, whereas the extinctions at the end of the Cretaceous probably wiped out more than half of all species, including the dinosaurs.

The impact hypothesis really has two parts: that such a collision occurred and that the event caused the Cretaceous extinctions. Much evidence in addition to the iridium layer supports the first part of the hypothesis--that a large comet or small asteroid crashed into Earth 65 million years ago. Earth is pocked with enough craters to tell us that many large objects have fallen on the planet in the past. Recent research has focused on the Chicxulub crater, a 65-million-year-old scar located beneath sediments on the Yucat&eacute;n coast of Mexico. About 180 km in diameter, the Chicxulub crater is about the right size to have been caused by an asteroid with a diameter of about 10 km.

Critical evaluation of the impact hypothesis now focuses on the second claim--that the collision caused the Cretaceous extinctions. Advocates of the impact hypothesis argue that the impact was large enough to darken the Earth for years, not months, and that the resulting reduction of photosynthesis would have lasted long enough for food chains to collapse. Some of the minerals in the dust cloud would also have caused severe acid precipitation (see Chapter 3). The crater's horseshoelike shape, along with evidence from sediments deposited during the late Cretaceous, indicates to some scientists that the Chicxulub asteroid struck Earth at a low angle from the southeast (FIGURE 25.6). Such an impact would have sent white-hot debris to the northwest, setting off a firestorm that within minutes would have killed most land plants and animals on the North American continent. This scenario could explain fossil evidence that extinction rates of species in North America were more severe and occurred in a briefer time than elsewhere. Less severe global effects would have developed more slowly after the initial catastrophe, which would explain why extinction rates during the late Cretaceous do not seem to have been uniform around the globe.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 25-6. Trauma for planet Earth and its Cretaceous life. The 65-million-year-old Chicxulub impact crater is located in the Caribbean Sea near the Yucat&aacute;n Peninsula of Mexico. The horseshoe shape of the crater and the pattern of debris in sedimentary rocks indicate that an asteroid or comet struck at a low angle from the southeast. This artist's interpretation represents the impact and its immediate effect-- a cloud of hot vapor and debris that could have killed most of the plants and animals in North America within minutes.

Although the debate over the impact hypothesis has muted somewhat, researchers maintain a healthy skepticism about the link between the Chicxulub impact event and the period of mass extinction at the end of the Cretaceous. The original Alvarez hypothesis triggered a strong research effort, fueled in part by its opponents, who contend that changes in climate due to continental drift, increased volcanism, and other processes on Earth, rather than extraterrestrial causes, could have caused mass extinction 65 million years ago. As some researchers point out, hypotheses about the Cretaceous extinctions may not be mutually exclusive. It is possible that an asteroid impact was the sudden final blow in an environmental assault on late Cretaceous life that included more gradual processes. And such collisions may have played roles in other mass extinctions. For example, in 2001, a research team reported geologic evidence that the Permian extinctions, the greatest dying of all, corresponded in time to an asteroid collision with Earth.

Whatever the causes, mass extinctions affect biological diversity profoundly. But there is a creative side to the destruction. The species that manage to survive these crises, whether by their adaptive qualities or by sheer luck, become the stock for new radiations that fill many of the biological roles vacated or newly created by the extinctions. We will trace several examples of such radiations in Unit Five.




