
 Sugars, the smallest carbohydrates, serve as fuel and carbon sources

Monosaccharides (from the Greek monos, single, and sacchar, sugar) generally have molecular formulas that are some multiple of CH2O (FIGURE 5.3). Glucose (C6H12O6), the most common monosaccharide, is of central importance in the chemistry of life. In the structure of glucose, we can see the trademarks of a sugar: The molecule has a carbonyl group () and multiple hydroxyl groups. Depending on the location of the carbonyl group, a sugar is either an aldose (aldehyde sugar) or a ketose (ketone sugar). Glucose, for example, is an aldose; fructose, a structural isomer of glucose, is a ketose. (Most names for sugars end in -ose.) Another criterion for classifying sugars is the size of the carbon skeleton, which ranges from three to seven carbons long. Glucose, fructose, and other sugars that have six carbons are called hexoses. Trioses (three-carbon sugars) and pentoses (five-carbon sugars) are also common.

Still another source of diversity for simple sugars is in the spatial arrangement of their parts around asymmetric carbons. (Recall from Chapter 4 that an asymmetric carbon is one attached to four different kinds of covalent partners.) Glucose and galactose, for example, differ only in the placement of parts around one asymmetric carbon (see the gray boxes in FIGURE 5.3). What may seem at first a small difference is significant enough to give the two sugars distinctive shapes and behaviors.

Although it is convenient to draw glucose with a linear carbon skeleton, this representation is not accurate. In aqueous solutions, glucose molecules, as well as most other sugars, form rings (FIGURE 5.4).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 5-4. Linear and ring forms of glucose.

Monosaccharides, particularly glucose, are major nutrients for cells. In the process known as cellular respiration, cells extract the energy stored in glucose molecules. Not only are simple sugar molecules a major fuel for cellular work, but their carbon skeletons serve as raw material for the synthesis of other types of small organic molecules, such as amino acids and fatty acids. Sugar molecules that are not immediately used in these ways are generally incorporated as monomers into disaccharides or polysaccharides.

A disaccharide consists of two monosaccharides joined by a glycosidic linkage, a covalent bond formed between two monosaccharides by a dehydration reaction. For example, maltose is a disaccharide formed by the linking of two molecules of glucose (FIGURE 5.5a). Also known as malt sugar, maltose is an ingredient for brewing beer. The most prevalent disaccharide is sucrose, which is table sugar. Its two monomers are glucose and fructose (FIGURE 5.5b). Plants generally transport carbohydrates from leaves to roots and other nonphotosynthetic organs in the form of sucrose. Lactose, the sugar present in milk, is another disaccharide, consisting of a glucose molecule joined to a galactose molecule.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 5-5. Examples of disaccharide synthesis.




