
 Redox reactions release energy when electrons move closer to electronegative atoms

Just what happens when catabolic pathways decompose glucose and other organic fuels? And why do these metabolic pathways yield energy? The answers are based on the transfer of electrons during the chemical reactions. The relocation of electrons releases the energy stored in food molecules, and this energy is used to synthesize ATP.

In many chemical reactions, there is a transfer of one or more electrons (e-) from one reactant to another. These electron transfers are called oxidation-reduction reactions, or redox reactions for short. In a redox reaction, the loss of electrons from one substance is called oxidation, and the addition of electrons to another substance is known as reduction.* To take a simple, nonbiological example, consider the reaction between sodium and chlorine to form table salt: 

We could generalize a redox reaction this way: 

In the generalized reaction, substance X, the electron donor, is called the reducing agent; it reduces Y. Substance Y, the electron acceptor, is the oxidizing agent; it oxidizes X. Because an electron transfer requires both a donor and an acceptor, oxidation and reduction always go together.

Not all redox reactions involve the complete transfer of electrons from one substance to another; some change the degree of electron sharing in covalent bonds. The reaction between methane and oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water, shown in FIGURE 9.3, is an example. As explained in Chapter 2, the covalent electrons in methane are shared equally between the bonded atoms because carbon and hydrogen have about the same affinity for valence electrons; they are about equally electronegative. But when methane reacts with oxygen to form carbon dioxide, electrons are shifted away from the carbon atoms to their new covalent partner, oxygen, which is very electronegative. Methane has thus been oxidized. The two atoms of the oxygen molecule also share their electrons equally. But when the oxygen reacts with the hydrogen from methane to form water, the electrons of the covalent bonds are drawn closer to the oxygen; the oxygen molecule has been reduced. Because oxygen is so electronegative, it is one of the most potent of all oxidizing agents.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 9-3. Methane combustion as an energy-yielding redox reaction. During the reaction, covalently shared electrons move away from carbon and hydrogen atoms and closer to oxygen, which is very electronegative. The reaction releases energy to the surroundings, because the electrons lose potential energy as they move closer to electronegative atoms.

Energy must be added to pull an electron away from an atom, just as energy must be added to push a large ball uphill. The more electronegative the atom (the stronger its pull on electrons), the more energy is required to keep the electron away from it, just as more energy is required to push a ball up a steeper hill. An electron loses potential energy when it shifts from a less electronegative atom (one with a weaker pull on electrons) toward a more electronegative one, just as a ball loses potential energy when it rolls downhill. A redox reaction that relocates electrons closer to oxygen, such as the burning of methane, releases chemical energy that can be put to work.




