
Chapter 21: THE GENETIC BASIS OF DEVELOPMENT

FROM SINGLE CELL TO MULTICELLULAR ORGANISM

   Embryonic development involves cell division, cell differentiation, and morphogenesis

   Researchers study development in model organisms to identify general principles



DIFFERENTIAL GENE EXPRESSION

   Different types of cells in an organism have the same DNA

   Different cell types make different proteins, usually as a result of transcriptional regulation

   Transcriptional regulation is directed by maternal molecules in the cytoplasm and signals from other cells



GENETIC AND CELLULAR MECHANISMS OF PATTERN FORMATION

   Genetic analysis of Drosophila reveals how genes control development:an overview

   Gradients of maternal molecules in the early embryo control axis formation

   A cascade of gene activations sets up the segmentation pattern in Drosophila: a closer look

   Homeotic genes direct the identity of body parts

   Homeobox genes have been highly conserved in evolution

   Neighboring cells instruct other cells to form particular structures: cell signaling and induction in the nematode

   Plant development depends on cell signaling and transcriptional regulation

This chapter applies much of what you've learned about molecules, cells, and genes to one of biology's most important questions--how a complex multicellular organism develops from a single cell. The application of genetic analysis and DNA technology to the study of development has brought about a revolution in the field. In much the same way that researchers have used mutations to deduce pathways of cellular metabolism, they now use mutations to dissect developmental pathways. In one striking example, Swiss researchers demonstrated in 1995 that a particular gene functions as a master switch that triggers the development of the eye inDrosophila.The scanning electron micrograph on this page shows the head of an abnormal fly with small extra eyes on its antennae. Expression of the master gene for eye development in an abnormal location in the fly caused the extra eyes. A similar gene triggers eye development in mice and other mammals. In fact, developmental biologists are discovering remarkable similarities in the mechanisms that shape diverse organisms.

The scientific study of development got under way about a century ago, around the same time as genetics. But for decades the two disciplines proceeded along mostly separate paths. We have seen how geneticists advanced from Mendel's laws to an understanding of the molecular basis of inheritance. Meanwhile, developmental biologists focused on embryology, the study of the stages of development leading from fertilized egg to fully formed organism. Only in recent years have the concepts and tools of molecular genetics reached the point where a real synthesis has been possible. The synthesis is a challenge, for it means relating the linear information in genes to a process of development that takes place in four dimensions, three of space and one of time.

This chapter introduces some of the basic genetic and cellular mechanisms that control development. It focuses on principles that apply to both animals and plants, with emphasis on two invertebrate animals: the fruit flyDrosophila melanogasterand the nematodeCaenorhabditis elegans.In later chapters, you will learn much more about the development of plants (Chapter 35) and animals (Chapter 47).

A capstone to the genetics unit, this chapter also serves as a bridge to the rest of the book, for understanding development is crucial to understanding the evolution, diversity, structure, function, and ecology of organisms.




