
 Technology is providing new tools for genetic testing and counseling

A preventive approach to simple Mendelian disorders is sometimes possible, because the risk that a particular genetic disorder will occur can sometimes be assessed before a child is conceived or during the early stages of the pregnancy. Many hospitals have genetic counselors who can provide information to prospective parents concerned about a family history for a specific disease.

Let's consider the case of a hypothetical couple, John and Carol, who are planning to have their first child and are seeking genetic counseling because of family histories of a lethal disease known to be recessively inherited. John and Carol each had a brother who died of the disorder, so they want to determine the risk of their having a child with the disease. From the information about their brothers, we know that both parents of John and both parents of Carol must have been carriers of the recessive allele. Thus, John and Carol are both products of Aa&#160;X&#160;Aa crosses, where a symbolizes the allele that causes this particular disease. We also know that John and Carol are not homozygous recessive (aa), because they do not have the disease. Therefore, their genotypes are either AA or Aa. Given a genotypic ratio of 1AA:2Aa:1aa for offspring of an Aa&#160;X&#160;Aacross, John and Carol each have a 2/3 chance of being carriers (Aa). Using the rule of multiplication, we can determine that the overall probability of their firstborn having the disorder is 2/3 (the chance that John is a carrier) multiplied by 2/3 (the chance that Carol is a carrier) multiplied by 1/4 (the chance of two carriers having a child with the disease), which equals 1/9. Suppose that Carol and John decide to take the risk and have a child--after all, there is an 8/9 chance that their baby will not have the disorder--but their child is born with the disease. We no longer have to guess about John's and Carol's genotypes. We now know that both John and Carol are, in fact, carriers. If the couple decides to have another child, they now know there is a 1/4 chance that the second child will have the disease.

When we use Mendel's laws to predict possible outcomes of matings, it is important to keep in mind that chance has no memory: Each child represents an independent event in the sense that its genotype is unaffected by the genotypes of older siblings. Suppose that John and Carol have three more children, and all three have the hypothetical hereditary disease. This is an unfortunate family, for there is only one chance in 64 (1/4 &#160;X&#160; 1/4 &#160;X&#160; 1/4) that such an outcome will occur. But this run of misfortune will in no way affect the result if John and Carol decide to have still another child. There is still a 1/4 chance that the additional child will have the disease and a 3/4 chance that it will not. Mendel's laws, remember, are simply rules of probability applied to heredity.

Carrier Recognition

Because most children with recessive disorders are born to parents with normal phenotypes, the key to assessing the genetic risk for a particular disease is determining whether the prospective parents are heterozygous carriers of the recessive trait. For some heritable disorders, there are now tests that can distinguish individuals of normal phenotype who are dominant homozygotes from those who are heterozygotes, and the number of such tests increases each year. Examples are tests that can identify carriers of the alleles for Tay-Sachs disease, sickle-cell disease, and the most common form of cystic fibrosis. On one hand, these tests enable people with family histories of genetic disorders to make informed decisions about having children. On the other hand, these new methods for genetic screening could be abused. If confidentiality is breached, will carriers be stigmatized? Will they be denied health or life insurance, even though they themselves are healthy? Will misinformed employers equate "carrier" with disease? And will sufficient genetic counseling be available to help a large number of individuals understand their test results?

New biotechnology offers possibilities of reducing human suffering, but not before key ethical issues are resolved. The dilemmas posed by human genetics reinforce one of this book's themes: the immense social implications of biology.

Fetal Testing

Suppose a couple learns that they are both Tay-Sachs carriers, but they decide to have a child anyway. Tests performed in conjunction with a technique known as amniocentesis can determine, beginning at the 14th to 16th week of pregnancy, whether the developing fetus has Tay-Sachs disease (FIGURE 14.17a). To perform this procedure, a physician inserts a needle into the uterus and extracts about 10 milliliters (mL) of amniotic fluid, the liquid that bathes the fetus. Some genetic disorders can be detected from the presence of certain chemicals in the amniotic fluid itself. Tests for other disorders, including Tay-Sachs disease, are performed on cells grown in the laboratory from the fetal cells that had been sloughed off into the amniotic fluid. These cultured cells can also be used for karyotyping to identify certain chromosomal defects (see FIGURE 13.3).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 14-17. Testing a fetus for genetic disorders.

In an alternative technique called chorionic villus sampling (CVS)(FIGURE 14.17b) a physician inserts a narrow tube through the cervix into the uterus and suctions out a tiny sample of fetal tissue from the placenta, the organ that transmits nutrients and fetal wastes between the fetus and the mother. Because the cells of the chorionic villi of the placenta are proliferating rapidly, enough cells are undergoing mitosis to allow karyotyping to be carried out immediately, giving results within 24 hours. This is an advantage over amniocentesis, in which the cells must be cultured for several weeks before karyotyping. Another advantage of CVS is that it can be performed as early as the eighth to tenth week of pregnancy. However, CVS is not suitable for tests requiring amniotic fluid, and it is less widely available than amniocentesis. Recently, medical scientists have developed methods for isolating fetal cells that have escaped into the mother's blood. Although very few in number, these cells can be cultured and then tested.

Other techniques allow a physician to examine a fetus directly for major anatomical abnormalities. One such technique is ultrasound, which uses sound waves to produce an image of the fetus by a simple noninvasive procedure. This procedure, which is also used to locate the fetus during amniocentesis, has no known risk to either fetus or mother. With another technique, fetoscopy,a needle-thin tube containing a viewing scope and fiber optics (to transmit light) is inserted into the uterus.

In about 1%  of the cases, amniocentesis or fetoscopy causes complications, such as maternal bleeding or fetal death. Thus, these techniques are usually reserved for cases in which the risk of a genetic disorder or other type of birth defect is relatively great. If the fetal tests reveal a serious disorder, the parents face the difficult choice of terminating the pregnancy or preparing to care for a child with a genetic disorder.

Newborn Screening

Some genetic disorders can be detected at birth by simple tests that are now routinely performed in most hospitals in the United States. One screening program is for the recessively inherited disorder called phenylketonuria (PKU), which occurs in about one out of every 10,000 to 15,000 births in the United States. Children with this disease cannot properly break down the amino acid phenylalanine. This compound and its by-product, phenylpyruvate, can accumulate to toxic levels in the blood, causing mental retardation. However, if the deficiency is detected in the newborn, a special diet low in phenylalanine can usually promote normal development and prevent retardation. Thus, screening newborns for PKU and other treatable disorders can be vitally important. Unfortunately, very few genetic disorders are treatable at the present time.

In this chapter, you have learned about the Mendelian model of inheritance and its application to human genetics. We owe the "gene idea," the concept of heritable factors transmitted according to simple rules of chance, to the elegant experiments of Gregor Mendel. Mendel's quantitative approach was foreign to the biology of his era, and even the few biologists who read his papers apparently overlooked the importance of his discoveries. It wasn't until the beginning of the 20th century that Mendelian genetics was rediscovered by biologists studying the role of chromosomes in inheritance. In the next chapter, you will learn how Mendel's laws have their physical basis in the behavior of chromosomes during sexual life cycles and how the synthesis of Mendelism and a chromosome theory of inheritance catalyzed progress in genetics.




