
 A cell's physical and chemical environment affects enzyme activity

The activity of an enzyme is affected by general environmental factors, such as temperature and pH, and also by particular chemicals that specifically influence that enzyme.

Effects of Temperature and pH

Recall from Chapter 5 that the three-dimensional structures of proteins are sensitive to their environment. As a protein, an enzyme has conditions under which it works optimally, because that environment favors the most active conformation for the enzyme molecule.

Temperature and pH are environmental factors important in the activity of an enzyme. Up to a point, the velocity of an enzymatic reaction increases with increasing temperature, partly because substrates collide with active sites more frequently when the molecules move rapidly. Beyond that temperature, however, the speed of the enzymatic reaction drops sharply. The thermal agitation of the enzyme molecule disrupts the hydrogen bonds, ionic bonds, and other weak interactions that stabilize the active conformation, and the protein molecule denatures. Each enzyme has an optimal temperature at which its reaction rate is fastest. This temperature allows the greatest number of molecular collisions without denaturing the enzyme. Most human enzymes have optimal temperatures of about 35-40&#176;C (close to human body temperature). Bacteria that live in hot springs contain enzymes with optimal temperatures of 70&#176;C or higher (FIGURE 6.16a).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 6-16. Environmental factors affecting enzyme activity. Each enzyme has an optimal (a) temperature and (b) pH that favor the active conformation of the protein molecule.

Just as each enzyme has an optimal temperature, it also has a pH at which it is most active. The optimal pH values for most enzymes fall in the range of pH 6-8, but there are exceptions. For example, pepsin, a digestive enzyme in the stomach, works best at pH 2. Such an acidic environment denatures most enzymes, but the active conformation of pepsin is adapted to the acidic environment of the stomach. In contrast, trypsin, a digestive enzyme residing in the alkaline environment of the intestine, has an optimal pH of 8 (FIGURE 6.16b).

Cofactors

Many enzymes require nonprotein helpers for catalytic activity. These adjuncts, called cofactors, may be bound tightly to the active site as permanent residents, or they may bind loosely and reversibly along with the substrate. The cofactors of some enzymes are inorganic, such as the metal atoms zinc, iron, and copper in ionic form. If the cofactor is an organic molecule, it is more specifically called a coenzyme. Most vitamins are coenzymes or raw materials from which coenzymes are made. Cofactors function in various ways, but in all cases they are necessary for catalysis to take place. You'll encounter examples of cofactors later in the book.

Enzyme Inhibitors

Certain chemicals selectively inhibit the action of specific enzymes (FIGURE 6.17). If the inhibitor attaches to the enzyme by covalent bonds, inhibition is usually irreversible. It is reversible, however, if the inhibitor binds by weak bonds.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 6-17. Inhibition of enzyme activity.

Some reversible inhibitors resemble the normal substrate molecule and compete for admission into the active site. These mimics, called competitive inhibitors, reduce the productivity of enzymes by blocking substrates from entering active sites. This kind of inhibition can be overcome by increasing the concentration of substrate so that as active sites become available, more substrate molecules than inhibitor molecules are around to gain entry to the sites.

So-called noncompetitive inhibitors do not directly compete with the substrate at the active site. Instead, they impede enzymatic reactions by binding to another part of the enzyme. This interaction causes the enzyme molecule to change its shape, rendering the active site unreceptive to substrate or leaving the enzyme less effective at catalyzing the conversion of substrate to product.

Some poisons absorbed from an organism's environment act by inhibiting enzymes. For example, the pesticides DDT and parathion are inhibitors of key enzymes in the nervous system. Many antibiotics are inhibitors of specific enzymes in bacteria. For instance, penicillin blocks the active site of an enzyme that many bacteria use to make their cell walls.

Mentioning enzyme inhibitors that are metabolic poisons may give the impression that enzyme inhibition is generally abnormal and harmful. In fact, selective inhibition and activation of enzymes by molecules naturally present in the cell are essential mechanisms in metabolic control, as we discuss next.




