
 Behavior results from both genes and environmental factors

A myth that is still perpetuated by the popular media is that behavior is due either to genes (nature) or to environmental influences (nurture). In biology, however, the nature-versus-nurture issue is not about either/or; it is about how both the genes and the environment influence the development of phenotypes, including behavioral phenotypes. If we consider the development of any behavioral trait, we find a series of environmental and genetic influences. As we discussed in Chapter 14, phenotype depends on both genes and the environment; behavioral traits have genetic and environmental components, as do all of an animal's anatomical and physiological features.

Thus, we can move from the question of whether behavior is genetic or environmental to ask how different factors influence a particular behavior. One approach to the question is in terms of the norm of reaction (see Chapter 14); we measure, for a particular genotype, what behavioral phenotypes develop in a range of environments. In some cases, much the same behavior develops in all environments; in other cases, the behavior is variable, depending on the environmental experience. It takes thorough research on each case to describe the genetic and environmental influences, as the case study in FIGURE 51.1 illustrates.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 51-1. Genetic and environmental components of behavior: a case study.

In a few cases, researchers have been able to link behaviors to specific genes. For instance, Marla Sokolowski, of Toronto University, studied a genetic polymorphism in a gene called dg2 in fruit flies (Drosophila). The gene influences the level of a protein that functions in signaling within cells. One allele of dg2 causes a relatively low level of the protein. This results in a behavioral phenotype called "sitter," in which the fly moves less than average. A different allele causes a higher level of the protein and a "rover" behavioral phenotype, in which the fly moves about more than average. In this example, a simple difference in one gene changes the behavioral phenotype. However, a complete account of the development of movement patterns in flies would require a look at many more genes in addition to dg2. The dg2 gene interacts with other genes, and environmental conditions are also influential. Most behavioral traits are polygenic, with environmental variables producing broad norms of reaction.

So what do the media reports of newly discovered genes for complex human behavioral traits, such as depression, violence, or alcoholism, really mean? According to Robert Plomin, director of the Center for Developmental and Health Genetics at Pennsylvania State University, research into the heritability of behavior is the best demonstration of the importance of environment. As Plomin puts it, genes and nongenetic environmental factors "build on each other."

The environmental factors that affect behavior are all conditions in which the genes underlying behavior are expressed. This includes the chemical environment within cells, as well as all the hormonal and other chemical and physical conditions experienced by a developing animal within an egg or womb. It also includes the multiple interactions among components of an animal's nervous system and effectors, as well as the varied chemical, visual, auditory, or tactile interactions with other organisms.




