
 Water balance and waste disposal depend on transport epithelia

In most animals, one or more kinds of transport epithelium--a layer or layers of specialized epithelial cells that regulate solute movements--are essential components of osmotic regulation and metabolic waste disposal. The most important feature of all transport epithelia is their ability to move specific solutes in controlled amounts in particular directions. Some transport epithelia directly face the outside environment, while others line channels connected to the outside by an opening on the body surface. Joined by impermeable tight junctions (see FIGURE 7.30), the cells of the epithelium form a barrier at the tissue-environment boundary. Like the Casparian strip in plant roots (see FIGURE 36.7), this arrangement ensures that any solutes moving between animal and environment must pass through selectively permeable membranes.

In most animals, transport epithelia are arranged into complex tubular networks with extensive surface areas. We find some of the best examples in the salt glands of marine birds, which spend months or years at sea and need to obtain both food and water from the ocean (FIGURE 44.12).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 44-12. Salt-excreting glands in birds. (a) Many marine birds, such as this albatross, can survive long periods at sea by drinking seawater. They can do this because they have a pair of nasal glands that secrete an excretory fluid much more salty than the ocean. Thus, even though drinking seawater brings in a lot of salt, the bird achieves a net gain of water (in contrast, humans who drink seawater must use more water to excrete the salt load than was gained by drinking). A seabird's salt glands empty via a duct into the nostrils, and the salty solution either drips off the tip of the beak or is exhaled in a fine mist. (b) This diagram shows one of several thousand secretory tubules in a salt-excreting gland. Each tubule is lined by a transport epithelium surrounded by capillaries, and drains into a central duct. (c) The secretory cells of the transport epithelium actively transport salt from the blood into the tubules. Notice that blood flows counter to the flow of salt secretion. By maintaining a concentration gradient of salt in the tubule (graded blue shading), this countercurrent system enhances salt transfer from the blood to the lumen of the tubule (see Chapter 42).

The molecular structure of plasma membranes determines the kinds and directions of solutes that move across transport epithelia. For example, salt-excreting glands remove excess sodium chloride from the blood. By contrast, transport epithelia in the gills of freshwater fishes move salts from the dilute surrounding water into the blood (this kind of solute movement--against a concentration gradient--requires the expenditure of ATP in active transport). Transport epithelia in excretory organs often have the dual functions of maintaining water balance and disposing of metabolic wastes.




