
 Torpor conserves energy during environmental extremes

Despite their many adaptations for homeostasis, animals may periodically encounter conditions that severely challenge their abilities to balance heat, energy, and materials budgets. For example, at certain seasons of the year (or certain times of day) temperatures may be extremely hot or cold, or food may be unavailable. One way animals can save energy while avoiding difficult and dangerous conditions is to use torpor, a physiological state in which activity is low and metabolism decreases.

Hibernation is long-term torpor that evolved as an adaptation to winter cold and food scarcity. When vertebrate endotherms (birds and mammals) enter torpor or hibernation, their body temperatures decline--in effect, their body's thermostat is turned down. The temperature reduction may be dramatic: Some hibernating mammals cool to as low as 1-2&#176;C, and a few even drop slightly below 0&#176;C in a supercooled (unfrozen) state. The resulting energy savings due to lower metabolic rate and less heat production are huge; metabolic rates during hibernation can be several hundred times lower than if the animal attempted to maintain normal body temperatures of 36-38&#176;C. This allows hibernators to survive for very long periods on limited supplies of energy, stored in the body tissues or as food cached in a burrow. For example, hibernation can take up as much as nine months of the year in some small mammals, leaving only three months for normal activity.

Certain ground squirrels are favorite research models for biologists interested in the physiology of hibernation. A Belding's ground squirrel living in the high mountains of California is active only during spring and summer, when it maintains a body temperature of about 37&#176;C and a metabolic rate of about 85 kcal per day (FIGURE 44.11). In September the squirrel retreats to a safe burrow where it spends the next eight months hibernating. For most of the hibernation season, the squirrel's body temperature is only slightly above burrow temperature (which may be close to freezing), and its metabolic rate is extremely low. Every week or two it arouses for a few hours, using metabolic heat to warm up to about 37&#176;C (these periodic arousals may be needed for maintenance functions that require high body temperature). In late spring, when outside temperature is climbing, the squirrel resumes normal endothermy. By hibernating, Belding's ground squirrels avoid severe cold and greatly reduce the amount of energy they need to survive the winter, when their normal food of grasses and seeds is not available. Instead of having to spend 150 kcal per day to maintain normal body temperatures in winter weather, a squirrel in its burrow spends an average of only 5-8 kcal per day (only about 1 kcal per day when hibernating) and can live on stored fat--without eating--for the entire hibernation season.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 44-11. Body temperature and metabolism during hibernation of Belding's ground squirrel.

Estivation, or summer torpor, also characterized by slow metabolism and inactivity, enables animals to survive long periods of high temperatures and scarce water supplies. Hibernation and estivation are often triggered by seasonal changes in the length of daylight. As the days shorten, some hibernators prepare for winter by storing food in their burrows; other species eat huge quantities of food and fatten dramatically. For example, ground squirrels double their weight in a month of gorging.

Many small mammals and birds exhibit a daily torpor that seems to be adapted to their feeding patterns. For instance, most bats and shrews feed at night and go into torpor when they are inactive during daylight hours. Chickadees and hummingbirds feed during the day and often undergo torpor on cold nights; the body temperature of chickadees drops as much as 10&#176;C at night, and that of hummingbirds can fall 25-30&#176;C. All endotherms that use daily torpor are relatively small; when active they have high metabolic rates and thus very high rates of energy consumption. During hours when they cannot feed, torpor enables them to survive on stored energy.

An animal's daily cycle of activity and torpor appears to be a built-in rhythm controlled by the biological clock (see Chapter 48). Even if food is made available to a shrew all day, it still goes through its daily torpor. The need for sleep in humans and the slight drop in body temperature that accompanies it may be an evolutionary remnant of a more pronounced daily torpor in our early mammalian ancestors.




