
 Cells are an organism's basic units of structure and function

The cell is the lowest level of structure capable of performing all the activities of life. All organisms are composed of cells, the basic units of structure and function (see FIGURE 1.2).

The Cell Theory

Robert Hooke, an English scientist, first described and named cells in 1665, when he observed a slice of cork (bark from an oak tree) with a microscope that magnified 30 times (30&#160;X&#160;). Apparently believing that the tiny boxes, or "cells," that he saw were unique to cork, Hooke never realized the significance of his discovery. His contemporary, a Dutchman named Anton van Leeuwenhoek, discovered organisms we now know to be single-celled. Using grains of sand that he had polished into magnifying glasses as powerful as 300&#160;X&#160;, Leeuwenhoek discovered a microbial world in droplets of pond water and also observed the blood cells and sperm cells of animals. In 1839, nearly two centuries after the discoveries of Hooke and Leeuwenhoek, cells were finally acknowledged as the universal units of life by Matthias Schleiden and Theodor Schwann, two German biologists. In a classic case of inductive reasoning--reaching a generalization based on many concurring observations--Schleiden and Schwann summarized their own microscopic studies and those of others by concluding that all living things consist of cells. This generalization forms the basis of what is known as the cell theory. This theory was later expanded to include the idea that all cells come from other cells. The ability of cells to divide to form new cells is the basis for all reproduction and for the growth and repair of multicellular organisms, including humans.

The Two Main Cell Types

All cells are enclosed by a membrane that regulates the passage of materials between the cell and its surroundings. And every cell, at some stage in its life, contains DNA, the heritable material that directs the cell's many activities.

Two major kinds of cells--prokaryotic cells and eukaryotic cells--can be distinguished by their structural organization. The cells of the microorganisms called bacteria and archaea are prokaryotic. All other forms of life are composed of eukaryotic cells. Much more complex than the prokaryotic cell, the eukaryotic cell is subdivided by internal membranes into many different functional compartments--membrane-enclosed organelles (FIGURE 1.4). In eukaryotic cells, the DNA is organized along with certain proteins into structures called chromosomes contained within a nucleus, the largest organelle of most eukaryotic cells. Surrounding the nucleus is the cytoplasm, consisting of a thick fluid (cytosol) in which are suspended the various organelles that perform most of the cell's functions. Some eukaryotic cells, including those of plants, have tough walls external to their membranes. Animal cells lack walls.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 1-4. Structural organization of eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells. The eukaryotic cell, found in plants, animals, and all other organisms except bacteria and archaea, is characterized by an extensive subdivision into many different functional compartments called organelles. The prokaryotic cell, unique to bacteria and archaea, is much simpler, lacking most of the organelles found in eukaryotic cells. Most prokaryotic cells are also much smaller than eukaryotic cells.

In the much simpler prokaryotic cell, the DNA is not separated from the rest of the cell in a nucleus. Prokaryotic cells also lack the cytoplasmic organelles typical of eukaryotic cells. Almost all prokaryotic cells have tough external cell walls.

Although prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells contrast sharply in complexity, we will see that they have some key similarities. Cells vary widely in size, shape, and specific structural features, but all are highly ordered structures that carry out complicated processes necessary for maintaining life.




