
 Vertebrate phylogeny is reflected in adaptations of the cardiovascular system

Humans and other vertebrates have a closed circulatory system, often called the cardiovascular system. The heart has one atrium or two atria (plural), the chambers that receive blood returning to the heart, and one or two ventricles, the chambers that pump blood out of the heart. Arteries, veins, and capillaries are the three main kinds of blood vessels, which in the human body extend a total distance of about 100,000 km. Arteries carry blood away from the heart to organs throughout the body. Within organs, arteries branch into arterioles, small vessels that convey blood to the capillaries. Capillaries are microscopic vessels with very thin, porous walls. Networks of these vessels, called capillary beds, infiltrate each tissue. It is across the thin walls of capillaries that chemicals, including dissolved gases, are exchanged by diffusion between the blood and the interstitial fluid surrounding the cells. At their "downstream" end, capillaries converge into venules, and venules converge into veins, which return blood to the heart. Notice that arteries and veins are distinguished by the direction in which they carry blood, not by the characteristics of the blood they contain. All arteries carry blood from the heart toward capillaries, and veins return blood to the heart from capillaries. The cardiovascular systems of different vertebrate taxa are variations of this general scheme, but they have been modified by natural selection.

Metabolic rate is an important factor in the evolution of cardiovascular systems. In general, animals with high metabolic rates have more complex circulatory systems and more powerful hearts than animals with low metabolic rates. Similarly, the complexity and number of blood vessels in a particular organ are correlated with that organ's metabolic requirements. Perhaps the most fundamental differences in cardiovascular adaptations are associated with gill breathing in aquatic vertebrates compared with lung breathing in terrestrial vertebrates.

A fish heart has two main chambers, one atrium and one ventricle (FIGURE 42.3a). Blood pumped from the ventricle travels first to the gills (the gill circulation), where it picks up oxygen and disposes of carbon dioxide across capillary walls (see photo on p. 871). The gill capillaries converge into a vessel that carries oxygen-rich blood to capillary beds in all other parts of the body (the systemic circulation). Blood then returns in veins to the atrium of the heart. Notice that in a fish, blood must pass through two capillary beds during each circuit. When blood flows through a capillary bed, blood pressure--the motive force for circulation--drops substantially (for reasons that will be explained shortly). Therefore, oxygen-rich blood leaving the gills flows to the systemic circulation quite slowly (although the process is aided by body movements during swimming). This constrains the delivery of oxygen to body tissues, and hence the maximum aerobic metabolic rate of fishes.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-3. Generalized circulatory schemes of vertebrates. Red symbolizes oxygen-rich blood, and blue represents oxygen-poor blood. (a) Fishes have a two-chambered heart and a single circuit of blood flow. (b) Amphibians have a three-chambered heart and two circuits of blood flow: pulmocutaneous and systemic. This double circulation delivers blood to systemic organs under high pressure. In the single ventricle, there is some mixing of oxygen-rich blood with oxygen-poor blood. (It is customary to illustrate cardiovascular systems with the right side of the heart on the left and the left side on the right, as if the body is facing you from the page.) (c) Mammals have a four-chambered heart and double circulation. Within the heart, oxygen-rich blood is kept completely segregated from oxygen-poor blood.

Frogs and other amphibians have a three-chambered heart, with two atria and one ventricle (FIGURE 42.3b). The ventricle pumps blood into a forked artery that splits the ventricle's output into the pulmocutaneous and systemic circulations. The pulmocutaneous circulation leads to capillaries in the gas-exchange organs (the lungs and skin in a frog), where the blood picks up oxygen and releases CO2 before returning to the heart's left atrium. Most of the returning oxygen-rich blood is pumped into the systemic circulation, which supplies all body organs and then returns oxygen-poor blood to the right atrium via the veins. This scheme, called double circulation, provides a vigorous flow of blood to the brain, muscles, and other organs because the blood is pumped a second time after it loses pressure in the capillary beds of the lungs or skin. This is distinctly different from the single circulation in the fish, where blood flows directly from the respiratory organs (gills) to other organs under reduced pressure.

In the ventricle of the frog, there is some mixing of oxygen-rich blood that has returned from the lungs with oxygen-poor blood that has returned from the rest of the body. However, a ridge within the ventricle diverts most of the oxygen-rich blood from the left atrium into the systemic circuit and most of the oxygen-poor blood from the right atrium into the pulmocutaneous circuit. Reptiles also have double circulation with pulmonary (lung) and systemic circuits, but there is even less mixing of oxygen-rich and oxygen-poor blood than in amphibians. Although the reptilian heart is three-chambered, the ventricle is partially divided.

In one order of reptiles, the crocodilians (crocodiles and alligators), and in all birds and mammals, the ventricle is completely divided into separate right and left chambers (FIGURE 42.3c). In this arrangement the left side of the heart receives and pumps only oxygen-rich blood, while the right side handles only oxygen-poor blood. Oxygen delivery is enhanced because there is no mixing of oxygen-rich and oxygen-poor blood, and double circulation restores pressure to the systemic circuit after blood has passed through the lung capillaries.

The evolution of a powerful four-chambered heart was an essential adaptation in support of the endothermic way of life characteristic of birds and mammals. Endotherms use about ten times as much energy as equal-sized ectotherms, and therefore their circulatory systems need to deliver about ten times as much fuel and oxygen to their tissues (and remove ten times as much CO2 and other wastes). This large traffic of substances is made possible by their separate and independent systemic and pulmonary circulations, and by having large and powerful hearts to pump the necessary volume of blood. Birds and mammals descended from different reptilian ancestors, and their powerful four-chambered hearts evolved independently--an example of convergent evolution.




