
 Western culture resisted evolutionary views of life

The Origin of Species was truly radical for its time; not only did it challenge prevailing scientific views, but it also shook the deepest roots of Western culture. Darwin's view of life contrasted sharply with the conventional paradigm of an Earth only a few thousand years old, populated by unchanging forms of life that had been individually made during the single week in which the Creator formed the entire universe. Darwin's book challenged a worldview that had been taught for centuries.

The Scale of Nature and Natural Theology

A number of classical Greek philosophers had ideas about the gradual evolution of life. But the philosophers who influenced Western culture most, Plato (427-347 B.C.) and his student Aristotle (384-322 B.C.), held opinions that opposed any concept of evolution. Plato believed in two worlds: a real world that is ideal and eternal and an illusory world of imperfection that we perceive through our senses. Evolution would be counterproductive in a world where ideal organisms were already perfectly adapted to their environments.

Aristotle believed that all living forms could be arranged on a scale, or ladder, of increasing complexity, later called the scala naturae ("scale of nature"). Each form of life had its allotted rung on this ladder, and every rung was taken. In this view of life, which prevailed for over 2,000 years, species are permanent, are perfect, and do not evolve.

In Judeo-Christian culture, the Old Testament account of creation fortified the idea that species were individually designed and nonevolving. In the 1700s, biology in Europe and America was dominated by natural theology, a philosophy dedicated to discovering the Creator's plan by studying nature. Natural theologians saw the adaptations of organisms as evidence that the Creator had designed each and every species for a particular purpose. A major objective of natural theology was to classify species in order to reveal the steps of the scale of life that God had created.

Carolus Linnaeus (1707-1778), a Swedish physician and botanist, sought to discover order in the diversity of life "for the greater glory of God." Linnaeus specialized in taxonomy, the branch of biology concerned with naming and classifying the diverse forms of life. He developed the two-part, or binomial, system of naming organisms according to genus and species that is still used today. In addition, Linnaeus adopted a system for grouping similar species into a hierarchy of increasingly general categories. For example, similar species are grouped in the same genus, similar genera (plural of genus) are grouped in the same family, and so on (see FIGURE 1.10). To Linnaeus, clustering similar species together implied no evolutionary kinship, but a century later his taxonomic system would become a focal point in Darwin's arguments for evolution.

Cuvier, Fossils, and Catastrophism

The study of fossils also helped lay the groundwork for Darwin's ideas. Fossils are relics or impressions of organisms from the past, preserved in rock (FIGURE 22.2). Most fossils are found in sedimentary rocks formed from the sand and mud that settle to the bottom of seas, lakes, and marshes. New layers of sediment cover older ones and compress them into superimposed layers of rock called strata. Later, erosion may scrape or carve through upper (younger) strata and reveal more ancient strata that had been buried. Fossils within the layers show that a succession of organisms has populated Earth throughout time (FIGURE 22.3).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 22-2. Fossils of trilobites, animals that lived in the seas hundreds of millions of years ago.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 22-3. Formation of sedimentary rock and deposition of fossils from different time periods.

Paleontology, the study of fossils, was largely developed by French anatomist Georges Cuvier (1769-1832). Realizing that the history of life is recorded in strata containing fossils, he documented the succession of fossil species in the Paris Basin. He noted that each stratum is characterized by a unique group of fossil species and that the deeper (older) the stratum, the more dissimilar the fossils are from modern life. Cuvier even recognized that extinction had been a common occurrence in the history of life. From stratum to stratum, new species appear and others disappear. Yet Cuvier was a staunch opponent of the evolutionists of his day. Instead, he advocated catastrophism, speculating that each boundary between strata corresponded in time to a catastrophe, such as a flood or drought, that had destroyed many of the species living there at that time. He proposed that these periodic catastrophes were usually confined to local geographic regions and that the ravaged region was repopulated by species immigrating from other areas.




