
Chapter 9: CELLULAR RESPIRATION: HARVESTING CHEMICAL ENERGY

THE PRINCIPLES OF ENERGY HARVEST

   Cellular respiration and fermentation are catabolic, energy-yielding pathways

   Cells recycle the ATP they use for work

   Redox reactions release energy when electrons move closer to electronegative atoms

   Electrons "fall" from organic molecules to oxygen during cellular respiration

   The "fall" of electrons during respiration is stepwise, via NAD+ and an electron transport chain



THE PROCESS OF CELLULAR RESPIRATION

   Respiration involves glycolysis, the Krebs cycle, and electron transport: an overview

   Glycolysis harvests chemical energy by oxidizing glucose to pyruvate: a closer look

   The Krebs cycle completes the energy-yielding oxidation of organic molecules: a closer look

   The inner mitochondrial membrane couples electron transport to ATP synthesis: a closer look

   Cellular respiration generates many ATP molecules for each sugar molecule it oxidizes: a review



RELATED METABOLIC PROCESSES

   Fermentation enables some cells to produce ATP without the help of oxygen

   Glycolysis and the Krebs cycle connect to many other metabolic pathways

   Feedback mechanisms control cellular respiration

Living is work. Cells organize small organic molecules into polymers, such as proteins and DNA. They pump substances across membranes. Many cells move or change their shapes. They grow and reproduce. Cells must work just to maintain their complex structure, because order is intrinsically unstable. To perform their many tasks, cells require transfusions of energy from outside sources. Energy enters most ecosystems in the form of sunlight, the energy source for plants and other photosynthetic organisms (FIGURE 9.1, p. 156). Animals, such as the orangutan in the photograph above, obtain fuel by eating plants, or by eating other organisms that eat plants. In this chapter, you will learn how cells harvest the chemical energy stored in organic molecules and use it to regenerate ATP, the molecule that drives most cellular work.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 9-1. Energy flow and chemical recycling in ecosystems. The mitochondria of eukaryotes (including plants and algae) use the organic products of photosynthesis as fuel for cellular respiration, which also consumes the oxygen produced by photosynthesis. Respiration harvests the energy stored in organic molecules to generate ATP, which powers most cellular work. The waste products of respiration, carbon dioxide and water, are the very substances that chloroplasts use as raw materials for photosynthesis. Thus, the chemical elements essential to life are recycled. But energy is not: It flows into an ecosystem as sunlight and leaves as heat.




