
 Offspring acquire genes from parents by inheriting chromosomes

Family friends may tell you that you have your mother's freckles, even though she still has hers. Parents do not, in any literal sense, give their children freckles, eyes, hair, or any other traits. What, then, actually is inherited? Parents endow their offspring with coded information in the form of hereditary units called genes. The tens of thousands of genes we inherit from our mothers and fathers constitute our genome. Our genetic link to our parents accounts for family resemblance. Your genome may include a gene for freckles, which you inherited from your mother. Our genes program the specific traits that emerge as we develop from fertilized eggs into adults.

Genes are segments of DNA. You learned in Chapters 1 and 5 that DNA is a polymer of four different kinds of monomers called nucleotides. Inherited information is passed on in the form of each gene's specific sequence of nucleotides, much as printed information is communicated in the form of meaningful sequences of letters. Language is symbolic. The brain translates words and sentences into mental images and ideas; for example, the object you imagine when you read "apple" looks nothing like the word itself. Analogously, cells translate genetic "sentences" into freckles and other features with no resemblance to genes. Most genes program cells to synthesize specific enzymes and other proteins, and it is the cumulative action of these proteins that produces an organism's inherited traits. The programming of these traits in the form of DNA is one of the unifying themes of biology.

The transmission of hereditary traits has its molecular basis in the precise replication of DNA, which produces copies of genes that can be passed along from parents to offspring. In animals and plants, the cellular vehicles that transmit genes from one generation to the next are sperm and ova (unfertilized eggs). After a sperm cell unites with an ovum (a single egg), genes from both parents are present in the nucleus of the fertilized egg.

Except for tiny amounts of DNA in mitochondria and chloroplasts, the DNA of a eukaryotic cell is subdivided into chromosomes within the nucleus. Every living species has a characteristic number of chromosomes. For example, humans have 46 chromosomes in almost all of their cells. Each chromosome consists of a single long DNA molecule elaborately coiled in association with various proteins. One chromosome includes hundreds or thousands of genes, each of which is a specific part of the DNA molecule. A gene's specific location along the length of a chromosome is called the gene's locus (plural, loci). Our genetic endowment consists of whatever genes happened to be part of the chromosomes we inherited from our parents.




