
 Two important characteristics of any population are density and the spacing of individuals

At any given moment, every population has geographic boundaries and a population size (the number of individuals it includes). Ecologists begin studying a population by defining boundaries appropriate to the organisms under study and to the questions being posed. A population's boundaries may be natural ones, such as a specific island in Lake Superior where terns nest, or they may be arbitrarily defined by an investigator, such as the oak trees within a specific county in Minnesota. Regardless of such differences, two important characteristics of any population are its density and its dispersion. Population density is the number of individuals per unit area or volume--the number of oak trees per square kilometer in the Minnesota county, for example. Dispersion is the pattern of spacing among individuals within the geographic boundaries of the population.

Measuring Density

In rare cases, it is possible to determine population size and density by actually counting all individuals within the boundaries of the population. We could count the number of sea stars in a tide pool, for example. Herds of large mammals, such as buffalo or elephants, can sometimes be counted accurately from airplanes (FIGURE 52.1). In most cases, however, it is impractical or impossible to count all individuals in a population. Instead, ecologists use a variety of sampling techniques to estimate densities and total population sizes. For example, they might estimate the number of alligators in the Florida Everglades by counting individuals in a few randomly chosen plots. Or they might count the numbers of oak trees in several randomly placed circular plots of 10-m diameter. Such estimates are more accurate when there are many sample plots and when the habitat is homogeneous.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 52-1. Aerial census for African buffalo (Syncerus caffer) in the Serengeti of East Africa. Biologists can count large mammals and birds in open habitats from the air, either directly or from photographs like this one. By repeating these counts over many years, researchers can track population trends.

One sampling technique researchers often use to estimate fish and wildlife populations is the mark-recapture method. Traps are placed within the boundaries of the study area, and captured animals are marked with tags, collars, bands, or spots of dye and then immediately released. After a few days or a few weeks--enough time for the marked animals to mix randomly with unmarked members of the population--traps are set again. The proportion of marked (recaptured) animals in the second trapping is assumed equivalent to the proportion of marked animals in the total population: 

Thus, if there have been no births, deaths, immigration, or emigration, the following proportionality provides an estimate of the population size N: 

For example, suppose that 50 snowshoe hares are captured in box traps, marked with ear tags, and released. Two weeks later, 100 hares are captured and checked for ear tags. If 10 hares in this second catch are already marked and thus are recaptures, we would estimate that 10%  of the total hare population is marked. Since 50 hares were originally marked, the entire population would be about 500 hares. This method assumes that each marked individual has the same probability of being trapped as each unmarked individual. This is not always a safe assumption, however. An animal that has been caught once may become wary of the traps later on or may learn to return to traps to eat the food used as bait.

In some cases, instead of counting individual organisms, population ecologists estimate density from some index of population size. This usually involves counting signs left by organisms, such as the number of nests, burrows, tracks, or fecal droppings.

Patterns of Dispersion

Within a population's geographic range, local densities may vary substantially because the environment is patchy (not all areas provide equally suitable habitat) and because individuals exhibit patterns of spacing in relation to other members of the population.

The most common pattern of dispersion is clumped, with the individuals aggregated in patches. Plants may be clumped in certain sites where soil conditions and other environmental factors favor germination and growth. The eastern red cedar is often found clumped on limestone outcrops, where soil is less acidic than in nearby areas. Mushrooms may be clumped on a rotting log. Some animals move in herds (see FIGURE 52.1). Animals often spend much of their time in a particular micro-environment that satisfies their requirements. For example, many forest insects and salamanders are clumped under logs, where the humidity remains high. Herbivorous animals of a particular species are likely to be most abundant where their food plants are concentrated. Clumping of animals may also be associated with mating behavior. For example, mayflies often swarm in great numbers, a behavior that increases mating chances for these insects, which spend only a day or two as reproductive adults. There may also be "safety in numbers"; fish swimming in large schools, for example, are often less likely to be eaten by predators than fish swimming alone or in small groups (FIGURE 52.2a).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 52-2. Patterns of dispersion within a population's geographic range.

In contrast to a clumped distribution of individuals within a population, a uniform, or evenly spaced, pattern of dispersion may result from direct interactions between individuals in the population. For example, a tendency toward regular spacing of plants may be due to shading and competition for water and minerals; some plants also secrete chemicals that inhibit the germination and growth of nearby individuals that could compete for resources. Animals often exhibit uniform dispersion as a result of territorial behavior and aggressive social interactions (FIGURE 52.2b). Uniform patterns are not as common in populations as clumped patterns.

Random spacing (unpredictable dispersion) occurs in the absence of strong attractions or repulsions among individuals of a population; the position of each individual is independent of other individuals. For example, trees in a forest are sometimes randomly distributed (FIGURE 52.2c). Random patterns are not as common in nature as one might expect; most populations show at least a tendency toward a clumped distribution.




