
 Population dynamics reflect a complex interaction of biotic and abiotic influences

There are good and bad habitats for every species. Carrying capacities can vary in space; some parts of a lake provide better fishing than other parts, for example. Carrying capacities can also vary in time; grasshoppers may be serious pests for farmers in some years and nearly absent in other years. Over the long term, most populations exhibit change. Some remain fairly stable in size, but most populations for which we have long-term data show fluctuations in numbers.

Although we can determine an average population size for many species, the average is often of less interest than the year-to-year or place-to-place trend in numbers. For example, FIGURE 52.16 illustrates the fluctuation in the number of northern pintail ducks from 1955 to 1998. Pintails nest in the prairie regions of the United States and Canada, and their present populations have declined considerably below the levels of the 1950s. Wildlife managers need to find out why these changes occur. Researchers have identified the loss of prairie ponds (either by drying up in droughts or by draining for agriculture) as one key abiotic factor contributing to the pintail duck decline shown in FIGURE 52.16. However, when heavy rains kept prairie ponds full in the 1990s, the pintails did not recover. Pintails nest in the stubble left after grain is harvested. More intensive agriculture in recent years has resulted in early cultivation of stubble fields and the destruction of many pintail nests. As more and more land is taken over by agricultural fields, duck nests also become concentrated in the remaining natural vegetation, enabling predators like foxes and skunks to steal eggs from the nests more efficiently.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 52-16. Decline in the breeding population of the northern pintail (Anas actua) from 1955 to 1998. Wildlife managers conduct extensive aerial surveys and ground counts each June throughout the breeding range in Canada and the United States to set hunting regulations for the autumn of each year.

Long-term population studies are also challenging the hypothesis that a combination of factors keeps populations of large mammals, such as deer and moose, relatively stable. FIGURE 52.17 shows changes in the moose population on Isle Royale, in Lake Superior, from 1959 to 2000. Moose numbers have been anything but stable, with two major increases and collapses over the last 40 years. Wolf predation is probably the main cause of the steady decline in numbers from 1973 to 1983. However, the more dramatic collapse in 1995-1996 was caused by severe winter weather and associated food shortage, leading to starvation of more than 75%  of the population. The severity of winter loss in large grazers and browsers inhabiting temperate and polar regions is proportional to the harshness of the winter. Colder temperatures increase energy requirements (and therefore the need for food), while deeper snow makes it harder to find food. The result can be widespread death from starvation.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 52-17. Long-term study of the moose (Alces alces) population of Isle Royale, Michigan. Isle Royale is 544 km2 in area and lies in Lake Superior 40 km from shore. Moose colonized the island around 1900 by moving across the ice. However, the lake has not frozen over in recent years, and thus the moose population is isolated from immigration or emigration.

Some populations fluctuate erratically. The Dungeness crab is a classic example (FIGURE 52.18). Only male crabs over a certain size are commercially harvested, on the assumption that there is a vast excess of males for successful reproduction. Females mature at 2 to 3 years of age and release up to 2 million eggs each fall. One key feature of the crabs' population dy namics is cannibalism. Juvenile crabs are cannibalized by older juveniles and by adult crabs. A second key feature is that successful settlement of larval crabs occurs only in shallow waters and depends on ocean currents and water temperature. If winds and currents move larval crabs too far offshore, they cannot reach the ocean bottom to settle successfully. The com bination of cannibalism and variable and unpredictable oceanic factors explains the marked fluctuations in populations of the Dungeness crab in the Pacific Northwest. Small changes in environmental variables seem to be magnified by density-dependent cannibalism. These results support the hypothesis that the dynamics of many populations result from a complex interaction of biotic and abiotic factors.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 52-18. Extreme population fluctuations. Populations of the Dungeness crab (Cancer magister), a commercially important species of the U.S. Pacific Northwest, are well known for their erratic fluctuations. This graph of the commercial catch of male crabs over a 40-year period at Fort Bragg, California, illustrates the general pattern. Researchers developed a mathematical model that simulates a mix of biotic factors (for example, intraspecific competition and cannibalism) and abiotic factors (for example, minor changes in water temperatures caused by alterations in ocean currents). The model accurately predicts the fluctuations in the actual catch.




