
 Reclaiming water is a major function of the large intestine

The large intestine, or colon, is connected to the small intestine at a T-shaped junction, where a sphincter (a muscular valve) controls the movement of material. One arm of the T is a pouch called the cecum (see FIGURE 41.13). Compared to many other mammals, humans have a relatively small cecum with a fingerlike extension, the appendix, which is dispens able. (Lymphoid tissue in the appendix makes a minor contribution to body defense.) The main branch of the human colon is shaped like an upside-down U about 1.5 m long.

A major function of the colon is to recover water that has entered the alimentary canal as the solvent of the various digestive juices. About 7 L of fluid are secreted into the lumen of the digestive tract each day, which is much more liquid than most people drink. Most of this water is reabsorbed along with nutrient absorption in the small intestine. The colon reclaims much of the remaining water in the lumen. Together, the small intestine and colon reabsorb about 90%  of the water that entered the alimentary canal. The wastes of the digestive tract, the feces, become more solid as they are moved along the colon by peristalsis. The movement is sluggish, and it generally takes about 12 to 24 hours for material to travel the length of the organ. If the lining of the colon is irritated--by a viral or bacterial infection, for instance--less water than normal may be reabsorbed, resulting in diarrhea. The opposite problem, constipation, occurs when peristalsis moves the feces along too slowly. An excess of water is reabsorbed, and the feces become compacted.

Living in the large intestine is a rich flora of mostly harmless bacteria. One of the common inhabitants of the human colon is Escherichia coli, a favorite research organism of molecular biologists (see Chapter 18). The presence of E. coli in lakes and streams is an indication of contamination by untreated sewage. Intestinal bacteria live on unabsorbed organic material. As by-products of their metabolism, many colon bacteria generate gases, including methane and hydrogen sulfide. Some of the bacteria produce vitamins, including biotin, folic acid, vitamin K, and several B vitamins. These vitamins, absorbed into the blood, supplement our dietary intake of vitamins.

Feces contain masses of bacteria, as well as cellulose and other undigested materials. Although cellulose fibers have no caloric value to humans, their presence in the diet helps move food along the digestive tract. Feces may also contain an abundance of salts. For instance, when iron and calcium concentrations in the blood get too high, the colon lining excretes salts of these elements into the lumen, and they are eliminated in the feces.

The terminal portion of the colon is called the rectum, where feces are stored until they can be eliminated. Between the rectum and the anus are two sphincters, one involuntary and the other voluntary. Once or more each day, strong contractions of the colon create an urge to defecate.




