
 Animal viruses are diverse in their modes of infection and replication

Everyone has suffered from viral infections, whether cold sores, influenza, or the common cold. TABLE 18.1 (p. 334) lists some important classes of animal viruses. Like all viruses, those that cause illness in humans and other animals can reproduce (replicate) only inside host cells.

Reproductive Cycles of Animal Viruses

Many variations on the basic scheme of viral infection and reproduction are represented among the animal viruses. One key variable is the type of nucleic acid that serves as a virus's genetic material (the basis for classification in TABLE 18.1). Another variable is the presence or absence of a membranous envelope. Rather than consider all the mechanisms of viral infection and reproduction, we will focus on the roles of viral envelopes and on the functioning of RNA as the genetic material of many viruses.

Table 18-1. Classes of Animal Viruses, Grouped by Type of Nucleic Acid

Class*Examples/DiseasesI. dsDNA**PapovavirusPapilloma (human warts, cervical cancer); polyoma (tumors in certain animals)AdenovirusRespiratory diseases; some cause tumors in certain animalsHerpesvirusHerpes simplex I (cold sores); herpes simplex II (genital sores); varicella zoster (chicken pox, shingles); Epstein-Barr virus (mononucleosis, Burkitt's lymphoma)PoxvirusSmallpox; vaccinia; cowpoxII. ssDNAParvovirusRoseola; most parvoviruses depend on co-infection with adenoviruses for growthIII. dsRNAReovirusDiarrhea; mild respiratory diseasesIV. ssRNA that can serve as mRNAPicornavirusPoliovirus; rhinovirus (common cold); -enteric (intestinal) virusesTogavirusRubella virus; yellow fever virus; encephalitis virusesV. ssRNA that is a template for mRNARhabdovirusRabiesParamyxovirusMeasles; mumpsOrthomyxovirusInfluenza virusesVI. ssRNA that is a template for DNA synthesisRetrovirusRNA tumor viruses (e.g., leukemia viruses); HIV (AIDS virus)Viral Envelopes. An animal virus equipped with an outer membrane, or viral envelope, uses it to enter the host cell (FIGURE 18.6). This membrane is generally a lipid bilayer, like a cellular membrane, with glycoproteins protruding from the outer surface. The glycoprotein spikes bind to specific receptor molecules on the surface of a host cell. The viral envelope then fuses with the host's plasma membrane, transporting the capsid and viral genome into the cell. After cellular enzymes remove the capsid, the viral genome can replicate and direct the synthesis of viral proteins, including glycoproteins for new viral envelopes. The endoplasmic reticulum of the host cell makes these glycoproteins, which in most cases are transported to the plasma membrane. There they are clustered in patches that serve as exit points for the viral progeny. The new viruses bud from the cell surface at these points, in a process much like exocytosis, wrapping themselves in membrane as they go. In other words, the viral envelope is derived from the host cell's plasma membrane, although some of the molecules of this membrane are specified by viral genes. The enveloped viruses are now free to spread the infection to other cells. This reproductive cycle does not necessarily kill the host cell, in contrast to the lytic cycles of phages.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 18-6. The reproductive cycle of an enveloped virus. The virus shown here has a genome of single-stranded RNA (class V in TABLE 18.1). 
			  
		 Glycoproteins on the viral envelope recognize and bind to specific receptor molecules (not shown) on the surface of the host cell. 
			  
		 The viral envelope fuses with the cell's plasma membrane, and the capsid and viral genome enter the cell. 
			  
		 Cellular enzymes remove the capsid. 
			  
		 The viral genome functions as a template for making complementary RNA strands (lighter color), which have two functions: 
			  
		 They serve as templates for making new copies of genome RNA, and 
			  
		 they serve as mRNA. The mRNA is translated into both capsid proteins and glycoproteins for the viral envelope. The cell's endoplasmic reticulum (ER) synthesizes the glycoproteins. 
			  
		 Vesicles transport the glycoproteins to the cell's plasma membrane. 
			  
		 A capsid assembles around each viral genome molecule. 
			  
		 The virus buds from the cell. Its envelope, studded with viral glycoproteins, is derived from the cell's plasma membrane.

Some viruses have envelopes that are not derived from plasma membrane. Herpesviruses, for example, have envelopes derived from the nuclear membrane of the host. The genomes of herpesviruses are double-stranded DNA, and these viruses reproduce within the cell nucleus, using a combination of viral and cellular enzymes to replicate and transcribe their DNA. While within the nucleus, herpesvirus DNA may become integrated into the cell's genome as a provirus, similar to a bacterial prophage. Once acquired, herpes infections (which may cause cold sores or genital sores, for instance) tend to recur throughout a person's life. Between these episodes, the virus apparently remains latent within the host cells' nuclei. From time to time, physical or emotional stress may cause the herpes proviruses to leave the host's genome and initiate active virus production, resulting in the blisters of active infections.

RNA as Viral Genetic Material. Although some phages and most plant viruses are RNA viruses, the broadest variety of RNA genomes is found among the viruses that infect animals. As TABLE 18.1 indicates, RNA viruses are classified according to the strandedness of their RNA and how it functions in a host cell. Notice that there are three types of single-stranded RNA genomes (classes IV-VI). The genome of class IV viruses can directly serve as mRNA and thus can be translated into viral protein immediately after infection. (How do you suppose new RNA genomes are made?) FIGURE 18.6 shows a virus of class V, in which the RNA genome serves as a template for mRNA synthesis. The RNA genome is transcribed into a strand of complementary RNA, which serves both as mRNA and as template for the synthesis of additional copies of genome RNA. Like all viruses that require RNA  RNA synthesis to make mRNA, this one uses a viral enzyme that is packaged with the genome inside the capsid.

The RNA viruses with the most complicated reproductive cycles are the retroviruses (class VI). Retro, meaning "backward," refers to the reverse direction in which genetic information flows for these viruses. Retroviruses are equipped with an enzyme called reverse transcriptase, which transcribes DNA from an RNA template, providing an RNA  DNA information flow. The newly made DNA then integrates as a provirus into a chromosome within the nucleus of the animal cell. The host's RNA polymerase transcribes the viral DNA into RNA molecules, which can function both as mRNA for the synthesis of viral proteins and as genomes for new virus particles released from the cell. A retrovirus of particular importance is HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), the virus that causes AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome). FIGURE 18.7a (p. 336) shows the structure of HIV, and FIGURE 18.7b traces its reproductive cycle, which is typical of a retrovirus. We will postpone a detailed discussion of AIDS until Chapter 43.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 18-7. HIV, a retrovirus.

Causes and Prevention of Viral Diseases in Animals

The link between a viral infection and the symptoms it produces is often obscure. Some viruses damage or kill cells by causing the release of hydrolytic enzymes from lysosomes. Some viruses cause the infected cells to produce toxins that lead to disease symptoms, and some have molecular components that are toxic, such as envelope proteins. How much damage a virus causes depends partly on the ability of the infected tissue to regenerate by cell division. We usually recover completely from colds because the epithelium of the respiratory tract, which the viruses infect, can efficiently repair itself. In contrast, the poliovirus attacks nerve cells, which do not divide and cannot be replaced. Polio's damage to such cells, unfortunately, is permanent. Many of the temporary symptoms associated with viral infections, such as fever, aches, and inflammation, actually result from the body's own efforts at defending itself against the infection.

As we will see in Chapter 43, the immune system is a complex and critical part of the body's natural defense mechanisms. The immune system is also the basis for the major medical weapon for preventing viral infections--vaccines. Vaccines are harmless variants or derivatives of pathogenic microbes that stimulate the immune system to mount defenses against the actual pathogen.

The term vaccine is derived from vacca, the Latin word for cow; the first vaccine, against smallpox, consisted of cowpox virus. In the late 1700s, Edward Jenner, an English physician, learned from his patients in farm country that milkmaids who had contracted cowpox (a milder disease, which usually infects cows) were resistant to subsequent smallpox infections. In his famous experiment in 1796, Jenner scratched a farmboy with a needle bearing fluid from a sore of a milkmaid who had cowpox. When the boy was later exposed to smallpox, he resisted the disease.

The cowpox and smallpox viruses are so similar that the immune system cannot distinguish them. Vaccination with the cowpox virus sensitizes the immune system to react vigorously if it is ever exposed to actual smallpox virus. Vaccination has eradicated smallpox, which was once a devastating scourge in many parts of the world. Effective vaccines have also been developed against many other viral diseases, including polio, rubella, measles, mumps, and hepatitis B.

Although vaccines can prevent certain viral illnesses, medical technology can do little, at present, to cure most viral infections once they occur. The antibiotics that help us recover from bacterial infections are powerless against viruses. Antibiotics kill bacteria by inhibiting enzymes or processes specific to the pathogens, but viruses have few or no enzymes of their own. However, a few drugs have been found that do combat viruses, mostly by interfering with viral nucleic acid synthesis. One such drug is AZT, which inhibits HIV reproduction by interfering with the action of reverse transcriptase. Another is acyclovir, which inhibits herpesvirus DNA synthesis.

Emerging Viruses

HIV, the AIDS virus, seemed to make a sudden appearance in the early 1980s. In 1993, dozens of people in the southwestern United States died from hantavirus infection, which the news media first described as a "new" disease. The deadly Ebola virus (FIGURE 18.8a) has menaced the peoples of central Africa periodically since its initial recognition in 1976. The Ebola virus is only one of several recently recognized viruses that cause hemorrhagic fever, an often fatal syndrome characterized by fever, vomiting, massive bleeding, and circulatory system collapse. A number of other dangerous new viruses cause encephalitis, inflammation of the brain. One example is the Nipah virus, which in 1999 killed 105 people in Malaysia and destroyed the country's pig industry. And each year, new strains of influenza virus cause millions to miss work or classes, and deaths from flu are not uncommon. From where or what do these and other "emerging viruses" arise?



Click image to enlarge



Fig 18-8. Emerging viruses. The term emerging viruses is used for viruses that have recently appeared or recently come to the attention of medical scientists. These colorized TEMs show two such viruses.

Three processes contribute to the emergence of viral diseases. First, the mutation of existing viruses is a major source of new viral diseases. RNA viruses tend to have an unusually high rate of mutation because the replication of their nucleic acid does not involve the proofreading steps of DNA replication. Some mutations enable existing viruses to evolve into new genetic varieties that can cause disease in individuals who had developed immunity to the ancestral virus. Flu epidemics are caused by viruses that are genetically different enough from earlier years' viruses that people have little immunity to them.

Another source of new viral diseases is the spread of existing viruses from one host species to another. Scientists estimate that about three-quarters of new human diseases have originated in other animals. For example, hantavirus (FIGURE 18.8b) is common in rodents, especially deer mice. The population of deer mice in the southwestern United States exploded in 1993 after unusually wet weather increased the rodents' food supply. Humans acquired hantavirus when they inhaled dust containing traces of urine and feces from infected mice.

Finally, the dissemination of a viral disease from a small, isolated population can lead to widespread epidemics. AIDS, for example, went unnamed and virtually unnoticed for decades before it began to spread around the world. In this case, technological and social factors, including affordable international travel, blood transfusion technology, sexual promiscuity, and the abuse of intravenous drugs, allowed a previously rare human disease to become a global scourge.

Thus, emerging viruses are generally not new, but are existing viruses that expand their host territory by evolving, by spreading to new host species, or by disseminating more widely in the current host species. Environmental change can increase the viral traffic responsible for emerging diseases. For example, new roads through remote areas can allow viruses to spread between previously isolated human populations. Another problem is the destruction of forests to expand crop land, an environmental disturbance that brings humans into contact with other animals that may host viruses capable of infecting humans.

Viruses and Cancer

Since 1911, when Peyton Rous discovered a virus that causes cancer in chickens, scientists have recognized that some viruses can cause cancer in animals. We know that these tumor viruses include members of the retrovirus, papovavirus, ade-no-virus, and herpesvirus groups (see TABLE 18.1).

There is strong evidence that viruses cause certain types of human cancer. The virus responsible for hepatitis B also seems to cause liver cancer in individuals with chronic hepatitis. And the Epstein-Barr virus, the herpesvirus that causes infectious mononucleosis, has been linked to several types of cancer prevalent in parts of Africa, notably Burkitt's lymphoma. Pap-illoma viruses (of the papovavirus group) have been associated with cancer of the cervix. Among the retroviruses, one called HTLV-1 causes a type of adult leukemia. All tumor viruses transform cells into cancer cells through the integration of viral nucleic acid into host cell DNA.

Scientists have identified a number of viral genes directly involved in triggering cancerous characteristics in cells. Many of these genes, called oncogenes, are not unique to tumor viruses or tumor cells; versions of these genes, called proto-oncogenes, are also found in normal cells. Proto-oncogenes generally code for proteins that affect the cell cycle, such as growth factors and proteins involved in growth factor action (for example, growth factor receptors). In some cases, the tumor virus lacks oncogenes and transforms the cell simply by turning on or increasing the expression of one or more of the cell's proto-oncogenes. Whatever the mechanism by which a particular virus causes cancer, there is evidence that more than one change must occur in a cell's genome to transform the cell into a fully cancerous state. It is likely that most tumor viruses cause cancer only in combination with other, mutagenic events, such as exposure to mutagens or mistakes in DNA replication or repair. (Cancer is covered further in Chapter 19.)




