
 Researchers discovered viruses by studying a plant disease

Microbiologists were able to detect viruses indirectly long before they were actually able to see them. The story of how viruses were discovered begins in 1883 with Adolf Mayer, a German scientist seeking the cause of tobacco mosaic disease. This disease stunts the growth of tobacco plants and gives their leaves a mottled, or mosaic, coloration (see FIGURE 18.9a). Mayer discovered that the disease was contagious when he found he could transmit it from plant to plant by spraying sap extracted from diseased leaves onto healthy plants. He searched for a microbe in the infectious sap but found none. Mayer concluded that the disease was caused by unusually small bacteria that could not be seen with the microscope. This hypothesis was tested a decade later by Dimitri Ivanowsky, a Russian who passed sap from infected tobacco leaves through a filter designed to remove bacteria. After filtering, the sap still produced mosaic disease.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 18-9. Viral infection of plants.

Ivanowsky clung to the hypothesis that bacteria caused tobacco mosaic disease. Perhaps, he reasoned, the pathogenic bacteria were so small they could pass through the filter. Or perhaps the bacteria made a filterable toxin that caused the disease. This latter possibility was ruled out in 1897 when the Dutch botanist Martinus Beijerinck discovered that the infectious agent in the filtered sap could reproduce. Beijerinck sprayed plants with the filtered sap, and after these plants developed mosaic disease, he used their sap to infect more plants, continuing this process through a series of infections. The pathogen must have been reproducing, for its ability to cause disease was undiluted after several transfers from plant to plant.

In fact, the pathogen could reproduce only within the host it infected. Unlike bacteria, the mysterious agent of mosaic disease could not be cultivated on nutrient media in test tubes or petri dishes. Also, the pathogen was not inactivated by alcohol, which is generally lethal to bacteria. Beijerinck imagined a reproducing particle much smaller and simpler than bacteria. His suspicions were confirmed in 1935, when the American scientist Wendell Stanley crystallized the infectious particle, now known as tobacco mosaic virus (TMV). Subsequently, TMV and many other viruses were actually seen with the help of the electron microscope.




