
 Geneticists can use recombination data to map a chromosome's genetic loci

The discovery of linked genes and recombination due to crossing over led one of Morgan's students, Alfred H. Sturtevant, to a method for constructing a genetic map, an ordered list of the genetic loci along a particular chromosome.

Sturtevant hypothesized that recombination frequencies calculated from experiments like the one in FIGURE 15.5 reflect the distances between genes on a chromosome. Assuming that the chance of crossing over is approximately equal at all points on a chromosome, he predicted that the farther apart two genes are, the higher the probability that a crossover will occur between them and therefore the higher the recombination frequency. His reasoning was simple: The greater the distance between two genes, the more points there are between them where crossing over can occur. With this idea in mind, Sturtevant began using recombination data from fruit fly crosses to assign to genes relative positions on chromosomes--that is, to map genes. A genetic map based on recombination frequencies is specifically called a linkage map.

FIGURE 15.6 shows Sturtevant's map of three genes relative to each other, the body-color (b) and wing-size (vg) genes depicted in FIGURE 15.5 and a third gene on the same chromosome, called cinnabar (cn). Cinnabar is one of many Drosophila genes affecting eye color. Cinnabar eyes, a mutant phenotype, are a brighter red than the wild-type color. The recombination frequency between cn and b is 9% , and the recombination frequency between cn and vg is 9.5% . In other words, crossovers between cn and b and between cn and vg are only about half as frequent as crossovers between b and vg (17% ). Only a map that locates cn about midway between b and vg is consistent with the data (as you can prove to yourself by drawing alternative maps). Sturtevant expressed the distances between genes in map units, defining one map unit as equivalent to a 1%  recombination frequency. Today, the word centimorgan is often used, in honor of Morgan.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 15-6. Using recombination frequencies to construct a genetic map. The method for making this type of map, called a linkage map, is based on the assumption that the probability of a crossover between two genetic loci is proportional to the distance separating the loci. In this example of a linkage map, re-combination frequencies have been used to locate three Drosophila genes: b, vg, and cn. The data best fit a sequence with cn positioned about halfway between the other two genes. The likely reason for the slightly low b-vg frequency is given in the text below.

Some genes on a chromosome are so far apart from each other that a crossover between them is virtually certain. The frequency of recombination measured between such genes can have a maximum value of 50% , a result indistinguishable from that for genes on different chromosomes. In fact, the seven characters that Mendel studied in his peas are not all on separate chromosomes, although the pea coincidentally has seven chromosome pairs. Seed color and flower color, for instance, are now known to be on chromosome 1. But they are so far apart on that chromosome that linkage is not observed in genetic crosses. Genes located far apart on a chromosome are mapped by adding the recombination frequencies from crosses involving each of the distant genes and a number of genes lying between them. Only for one pair of the genes Mendel studied, the genes for plant height and pod shape, do modern biologists observe linkage. Although Mendel observed segregation of alleles for each of these characters in monohybrid crosses, he did not report the results of dihybrid crosses for this particular combination of characters.

Even when the distance between genetic loci on a chromosome is not great enough to "unlink" them, it may be great enough to create a significant likelihood of more than one crossover between the loci. A second crossover "cancels out" the first and thus reduces the observed number of recombinant offspring. Multiple crossovers are the main reason for the numerical discrepancy in FIGURE 15.6, where the recombination frequency between b and vg is less than the sum of the b-cn and cn-vg frequencies.

Using crossover data, Sturtevant and his colleagues were able to map the other identified Drosophila genes in linear arrays. They found that the genes clustered into four groups of linked genes. Because microscopists had found four pairs of chromosomes in Drosophila cells, this clustering of genes was additional evidence that genes are located on chromosomes. Each chromosome has a linear array of specific gene loci (FIGURE 15.7).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 15-7. A partial genetic map of a Drosophila chromosome. This simplified map shows just a few of the genes that have been mapped on Drosophila chromosome II. Notice that more than one gene can affect a given phenotypic characteristic, such as eye color.

Because a linkage map is based on recombination frequencies, it is not really a picture of a chromosome. The frequency of crossing over is not actually uniform over the length of the chromosome, and therefore map units do not have absolute size (in nanometers, for instance). Thus, a linkage map portrays the sequence of genes along a chromosome, but it does not give the precise locations of genes. Other methods enable geneticists to construct cytological maps of chromosomes, which locate genes with respect to chromosomal features, such as stained bands, that can be seen in the microscope (see FIGURE 15.14). The ultimate genetic maps, which we'll discuss in Chapter 20, show the distances between gene loci in DNA nucleotides. Comparing a linkage map with this type of map (or even with a cytological map) of the same chromosome, we find that the sequence of genes matches, but the spacing between them does not.




