
 Structural differences of arteries, veins, and capillaries correlate with their different functions

All blood vessels are built of similar tissues. The walls of both arteries and veins, for instance, have three similar layers (FIGURE 42.8, p. 878). On the outside, a layer of connective tissue with elastic fibers allows the vessel to stretch and recoil. A middle layer contains smooth muscle and more elastic fibers. Lining the lumen of all blood vessels, including capillaries, is an endothelium, a single layer of flattened cells that provides a smooth surface that minimizes resistance to the flow of blood.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-8. The structure of blood vessels. In the micrograph (SEM), an artery can be seen next to a thinner-walled vein.

Structural differences correlate with the different functions of arteries, veins, and capillaries. Capillaries lack the two outer layers, and their very thin walls consist only of endothelium and its basement membrane. This facilitates the exchange of substances between the blood and the interstitial fluid that bathes the cells. Arteries have thicker middle and outer layers than veins. Blood flows through the vessels of the circulatory system at uneven speeds and pressures. The thicker walls of arteries provide strength to accommodate blood pumped rapidly and at high pressure by the heart, and their elasticity helps maintain blood pressure even when the heart relaxes between contractions. The thinner-walled veins convey blood back to the heart at low velocity and pressure. Blood flows through the veins mainly as a result of muscle action; whenever we move, our skeletal muscles pinch our veins and squeeze blood through them. Within large veins, flaps of tissue act as one-way valves that allow blood to flow only toward the heart (FIGURE 42.9).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-9. Blood flow in veins. Contracting skeletal muscles squeeze the veins. Flaps of tissue within the veins act as one-way valves that keep blood moving only toward the heart. If we sit or stand too long, the lack of muscular activity causes our feet to swell with stranded blood unable to return to the heart.




