
 Cellular respiration and fermentation are catabolic, energy-yielding pathways

Organic compounds store energy in their arrangement of atoms. With the help of enzymes, a cell systematically degrades complex organic molecules that are rich in potential energy to simpler waste products that have less energy. Some of the energy taken out of chemical storage can be used to do work; the rest is dissipated as heat. As you learned in Chapter 6, metabolic pathways that release stored energy by breaking down complex molecules are called catabolic pathways. One catabolic process, fermentation, is a partial degradation of sugars that occurs without the help of oxygen. However, the most prevalent and efficient catabolic pathway is cellular respiration, in which oxygen is consumed as a reactant along with the organic fuel. In eukaryotic cells, mitochondria house most of the metabolic equipment for cellular respiration.

Although very different in mechanism, respiration is in principle similar to the combustion of gasoline in an automobile engine after oxygen is mixed with the fuel (hydrocarbons). Food is the fuel for respiration, and the exhaust is carbon dioxide and water. The overall process can be summarized as follows: 

Although carbohydrates, fats, and proteins can all be processed and consumed as fuel, it is traditional to learn the steps of cellular respiration by tracking the degradation of the sugar glucose (C6H12O6): 

This breakdown of glucose is exergonic, having a free-energy change of -686 kcal (-2,870 kJ) per mole of glucose decomposed (DG = -686 kcal/mol); recall that a negative DG indicates that the products of the chemical process store less energy than the reactants.

Catabolic pathways do not directly move flagella, pump solutes across membranes, polymerize monomers, or perform other cellular work. Catabolism is linked to work by a chemical drive shaft: ATP. The processes of cellular respiration and fermentation are complex and challenging to learn. Therefore, as you study this chapter, it will help you to keep in mind your main objective: discovering how cells use the energy stored in food molecules to make ATP.




