
 Water moderates temperatures on Earth

Water stabilizes air temperatures by absorbing heat from air that is warmer and releasing the stored heat to air that is cooler. Water is effective as a heat bank because it can absorb or release a relatively large amount of heat with only a slight change in its own temperature. To understand this quality of water, we must first look briefly at heat and temperature.

Heat and Temperature

Anything that moves has kinetic energy, the energy of motion. Atoms and molecules have kinetic energy because they are always moving, although not necessarily in any particular direction. The faster a molecule moves, the greater its kinetic energy. Heat is a measure of the total quantity of kinetic energy due to molecular motion in a body of matter. Temperature measures the intensity of heat due to the average kinetic energy of the molecules. When the average speed of the molecules increases, a thermometer records this as a rise in temperature. Heat and temperature are related, but they are not the same. A swimmer crossing the English Channel has a higher temperature than the water, but the ocean contains far more heat because of its volume.

Whenever two objects of different temperature are brought together, heat passes from the warmer to the cooler body until the two are the same temperature. Molecules in the cooler object speed up at the expense of the kinetic energy of the warmer object. An ice cube cools a drink not by adding coldness to the liquid, but by absorbing heat as the ice melts.

Throughout this book, we will use the Celsius scale to indicate temperature (Celsius degrees are abbreviated as &#176;C). At sea level, water freezes at 0&#176;C and boils at 100&#176;C. The temperature of the human body averages 37&#176;C, and comfortable room temperature is about 20-25&#176;C.

One convenient unit of heat used in this book is the calorie (cal). A calorie is the amount of heat energy it takes to raise the temperature of 1 g of water by 1&#176;C. Conversely, a calorie is also the amount of heat that 1 g of water releases when it cools by 1&#176;C. A kilocalorie (kcal), 1,000 cal, is the quantity of heat required to raise the temperature of 1 kilogram (kg) of water by 1&#176;C. (The "calories" on food packages are actually kilocalories.) Another energy unit used in this book is the joule (J). One joule equals 0.239 cal; a calorie equals 4.184 J.

Water's High Specific Heat

The ability of water to stabilize temperature stems from its relatively high specific heat. The specific heat of a substance is defined as the amount of heat that must be absorbed or lost for 1 g of that substance to change its temperature by 1&#176;C. We already know water's specific heat because we have defined a calorie as the amount of heat that causes 1 g of water to change its temperature by 1&#176;C. Therefore, the specific heat of water is 1 calorie per gram per degree Celsius, abbreviated as 1 cal/g/&#176;C. Compared with most other substances, water has an unusually high specific heat. For example, ethyl alcohol, the type of alcohol in alcoholic beverages, has a specific heat of 0.6 cal/g/&#176;C.

Because of the high specific heat of water relative to other materials, water will change its temperature less when it absorbs or loses a given amount of heat. The reason you can burn your fingers by touching the metal handle of a pot on the stove when the water in the pot is still lukewarm is that the specific heat of water is ten times greater than that of iron. In other words, it will take only 0.1 cal to raise the temperature of 1 g of iron 1&#176;C. Specific heat can be thought of as a measure of how well a substance resists changing its temperature when it absorbs or releases heat. Water resists changing its temperature; when it does change its temperature, it absorbs or loses a relatively large quantity of heat for each degree of change.

We can trace water's high specific heat, like many of its other properties, to hydrogen bonding. Heat must be absorbed in order to break hydrogen bonds, and heat is released when hydrogen bonds form. A calorie of heat causes a relatively small change in the temperature of water because much of the heat energy is used to disrupt hydrogen bonds before the water molecules can begin moving faster. And when the temperature of water drops slightly, many additional hydrogen bonds form, releasing a considerable amount of energy in the form of heat.

What is the relevance of water's high specific heat to life on Earth? A large body of water can absorb and store a huge amount of heat from the sun in the daytime and during summer, while warming up only a few degrees. At night and during winter, the gradually cooling water can warm the air. This is the reason coastal areas generally have milder climates than inland regions. The high specific heat of water also tends to stabilize ocean temperatures, creating a favorable environment for marine life. Thus, because of its high specific heat, the water that covers most of Earth keeps temperature fluctuations on land and in water within limits that permit life. Also, because organisms are made primarily of water, they are more able to resist changes in their own temperatures than if they were made of a liquid with a lower specific heat.

Evaporative Cooling

Molecules of any liquid stay close together because they are attracted to one another. Molecules moving fast enough to overcome these attractions can depart the liquid and enter the air as gas. This transformation from a liquid to a gas is called vaporization, or evaporation. Recall that the speed of molecular movement varies and that temperature is the average kinetic energy of molecules. Even at low temperatures, the speediest molecules can escape into the air. Some evaporation occurs at any temperature; a glass of water, for example, will eventually evaporate at room temperature. If a liquid is heated, the average kinetic energy of molecules increases and the liquid evaporates more rapidly.

Heat of vaporization is the quantity of heat a liquid must absorb for 1 g of it to be converted from the liquid to the gaseous state. Compared with most other liquids, water has a high heat of vaporization. To evaporate each gram of water at room temperature, about 580 cal of heat is needed-nearly double the amount needed to vaporize a gram of alcohol or ammonia. Water's high heat of vaporization is another emergent property caused by hydrogen bonds, which must be broken before the molecules can make their exodus from the liquid.

Water's high heat of vaporization helps moderate Earth's climate. A considerable amount of solar heat absorbed by tropical seas is consumed during the evaporation of surface water. Then, as moist tropical air circulates poleward, it releases heat as it condenses to form rain.

As a liquid evaporates, the surface of the liquid that remains behind cools down. This evaporative cooling occurs because the "hottest" molecules, those with the greatest kinetic energy, are the most likely to leave as gas. It is as if the 100 fastest runners at a college transferred to another school; the average speed of the remaining students would decline.

Evaporative cooling of water contributes to the stability of temperature in lakes and ponds and also provides a mechanism that prevents terrestrial organisms from overheating. For example, evaporation of water from the leaves of a plant helps keep the tissues in the leaves from becoming too warm in the sunlight. Evaporation of sweat from human skin dissipates body heat and helps prevent overheating on a hot day or when excess heat is generated by strenuous activity (FIGURE 3.4). High humidity on a hot day increases discomfort because the high concentration of water vapor in the air inhibits the evaporation of sweat from the body.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 3-4. Evaporative cooling. Because of water's high heat of vaporization, evaporation of sweat significantly cools the body surface.




