
 Regulatory mechanisms ensure a dynamic balance in living systems

If you strike a match, it undergoes a chemical reaction in which the chemical energy in its molecules is transformed into heat and light. Burning is unregulated energy transformation, obviously not a suitable way for living cells to transform energy. Organisms are able to obtain useful energy from fuel molecules such as sugar because cells break the molecules down in a series of closely regulated chemical reactions.

Regulation of the chemical reactions within cells centers on protein molecules called enzymes. Produced by the cells in which they function, enzymes are catalysts, substances that speed up chemical reactions. When your muscle cells need a lot of energy during exercise, enzymes catalyze the rapid breakdown of sugar (glucose) molecules, releasing energy that can be put to work. In contrast, when you rest, other enzymes catalyze the chemical conversion of glucose to storage substances that may be added to the body's fuel reserves. With one group of enzymes catalyzing the breakdown of glucose and another group catalyzing its formation, how is order maintained in the cell? A big part of the answer is that regulatory mechanisms determine precisely when, where, and how fast certain reactions occur in a cell.

Many biological processes are self-regulating, operating by a mechanism called feedback, in which an output or product of a process regulates that process. Negative feedback, also called feedback inhibition, slows or stops processes; positive feedback speeds a process up (FIGURE 1.8).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 1-8. Regulation by feedback mechanisms.

Mammals and birds have a negative-feedback system that keeps body temperature within a narrow range, despite wide fluctuations in the animal's surroundings. A "thermostat" in the brain controls processes that hold the temperature of the blood close to a set point (about 37&#176;C in mammals). For instance, when the human body starts getting hot, signals from the brain's control center increase the activity of sweat glands and the diameter of blood vessels in the skin. Evaporative cooling results as sweating increases, and heat radiates from the blood vessels as they fill with warm blood. Negative feedback occurs as soon as the blood cools back to the set point, causing the control center to stop sending signals to the skin. If the blood temperature drops below the set point, the brain's control center inactivates the sweat glands and constricts the skin's blood vessels. This shunts blood to deeper tissues, reducing heat loss. When the blood warms back to the set point, negative feedback occurs again, and signals from the control center cease. This type of steady-state regulation, which keeps an internal factor such as body temperature within narrow tolerance limits, is called homeostasis (see FIGURE 1.3f).

The clotting of blood is an example of positive feedback. When a blood vessel is injured, structures in the blood called platelets start accumulating at the site. Positive feedback occurs as chemicals released by the platelets attract more platelets, and the platelet cluster initiates a complex sequence of chemical reactions that seals the wound with a clot.

Regulation by positive and negative feedback is a pervasive theme in biology, and we will see numerous examples throughout this text.




