
Chapter 39: PLANT RESPONSES TO INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL SIGNALS

SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION AND PLANT RESPONSES

   Signal-transduction pathways link internal and environmental signals to cellular responses



PLANT RESPONSES TO HORMONES

   Research on how plants grow toward light led to the discovery of plant hormones

   Plant hormones help coordinate growth, development, and responses to environmental stimuli



PLANT RESPONSES TO LIGHT

   Blue-light photoreceptors are a heterogeneous group of pigments

   Phytochromes function as photoreceptors in many plant responses to light

   Biological clocks control circadian rhythms in plants and other eukaryotes

   Light entrains the biological clock

   Photoperiodism synchronizes many plant responses to changes of season



PLANT RESPONSES TO ENVIRONMENTAL STIMULI OTHER THAN LIGHT

   Plants respond to environmental stimuli through a combination of developmental and physiological mechanisms



PLANT DEFENSE: RESPONSES TO HERBIVORES AND PATHOGENS

   Plants deter herbivores with both physical and chemical defenses

   Plants use multiple lines of defense against pathogens

At every stage in the life of a plant, sensitivity to the environment and coordination of responses are evident. One part of a plant can send signals to other parts. For example, the terminal bud at the apex of a shoot is able to suppress the growth of axillary buds that may be many meters away. Plants keep track of the time of day and the time of year. They can sense gravity and the direction of light. For example, the grass seedling in the photograph on this page is growing toward light. A plant's morphology and physiology are constantly tuned to its variable surroundings by complex interactions between environmental stimuli and internal signals.

This chapter focuses on how plants respond to these external and internal cues. At the organismal level, plants and animals respond to environmental stimuli by very different means. Animals, being mobile, respond mainly by behavioral mechanisms, moving toward positive stimuli and away from negative stimuli. Rooted to one location for life, a plant generally responds to environmental cues by adjusting its pattern of growth and development. For this reason, plants of the same species vary in body form much more than do animals of the same species. All lions have four limbs and approximately the same body proportions, but oak trees vary considerably in their number of limbs and their shapes. But at the cellular level, plants, animals, and all other eukaryotes are surprisingly similar in their signaling mechanisms. We begin our study of plant response with the role of signal transduction in plant cells.




