
 From egg to organism, an animal's form develops gradually: the concept of epigenesis

The question of how an egg becomes an animal has been asked for centuries. As recently as the 18th century, the prevailing view was that the egg or sperm contains an embryo that is a preformed, miniature infant (FIGURE 47.1). Development was thought to be simply the enlargement of the embryo. This idea of preformation came to include the notion that the embryo must contain all its descendants: a series of successively smaller embryos within embryos, like Russian nesting dolls. One theologian proposed that Eve, in the Garden of Eden, stored all future humanity within her.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 47-1. A "homunculus" inside the head of a human sperm. According to one version of the preformation idea, a sperm contains a preformed, miniature infant, which simply grows in size during embryonic development. This engraving was made in 1694.

The competing theory of embryonic development was epigenesis, originally proposed 2,000 years earlier by Aristotle. According to this idea, the form of an animal emerges gradually from a relatively formless egg. As microscopy improved during the 19th century, biologists could see that embryos took shape in a series of progressive steps, and epigenesis displaced preformation as the favored explanation among embryologists.

Modern biology, of course, has completely discarded the idea of a tiny person living in an egg or sperm cell. But when interpreted in broader terms, the concept of preformation may have some merit. Although an embryo's form emerges gradually as it develops from a fertilized egg, something is preformed in the zygote. As discussed in Chapter 21, an organism's development is largely determined by the genome of the zygote and the organization of the cytoplasm of the egg cell. Messenger RNA, proteins, and other substances made by the mother are heterogeneously distributed in the unfertilized egg, and these substances have a profound effect on the development of the future embryo in most animal species (mammals may be an exception, as we will discuss later). After fertilization produces a zygote, cell division partitions the cytoplasm in such a way that nuclei of different embryonic cells are exposed to different cytoplasmic environments. This sets the stage for the expression of different genes in different cells. As cell division continues and the embryo develops, inherited traits emerge by mechanisms that selectively control gene expression, leading to the differentiation (specialization) of cells. The timely communication of instructions, telling cells precisely what to do when, is essential. This information transfer occurs by cell signaling among different embryonic cells. Along with cell division and differentiation, development involves morphogenesis, the process by which an animal takes shape. Thus, the overall process of development is one of epigenesis.

In the first half of the chapter we will survey the early stages of embryonic development, when the body plan of an animal emerges from the fertilized egg. In the second half of the chapter we will look at the cellular and molecular mechanisms that play major roles in the developmental process. We begin with the fertilization of an egg cell by a sperm.




