
 The search for the genetic material led to DNA

Once T. H. Morgan's group showed that genes are located on chromosomes, the two chemical components of chromosomes--DNA and protein--became the candidates for the genetic material. Until the 1940s, the case for proteins seemed stronger, especially since biochemists had identified them as a class of macromolecules with great heterogeneity and specificity of function, essential requirements for the hereditary material. Moreover, little was known about nucleic acids, whose physical and chemical properties seemed far too uniform to account for the multitude of specific inherited traits exhibited by every organism. This view gradually changed, as experiments with micro-organisms yielded unexpected results. As with the work of Mendel and Morgan, a key factor in determining the identity of the genetic material was the choice of appropriate experimental organisms. Bacteria and the viruses that infect them are far simpler than pea plants, fruit flies, or humans, and the role of DNA in heredity was first worked out by studying such microbes. In this section, we will trace the search for the genetic material in some detail as a case study of the scientific process.

Evidence That DNA Can Transform Bacteria

We can trace the discovery of the genetic role of DNA back to 1928. Frederick Griffith, a British medical officer, was studying Streptococcus pneumoniae, a bacterium that causes pneumonia in mammals. Griffith had two strains (varieties) of the bacterium, a pathogenic (disease-causing) one and a variant that was harmless. He was surprised to find that when he killed the pathogenic bacteria with heat and then mixed the cell remains with living bacteria of the harmless strain, some of the living cells were converted to the pathogenic form (FIGURE 16.1). Furthermore, this new trait of pathogenicity was inherited by all the descendants of the transformed bacteria. Clearly, some chemical component of the dead pathogenic cells caused this heritable change, although the identity of the substance was not known. Griffith called the phenomenon transformation, now defined as a change in genotype and phenotype due to the assimilation of external DNA by a cell. (This usage of transformation should not be confused with the conversion of a normal animal cell to a cancerous one, discussed in Chapter 12.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 16-1. Transformation of bacteria. The S strain of Streptococcus pneumoniae causes pneumonia; the R strain is nonpathogenic. Griffith discovered that a mixture of heat killed S cells and live R cells killed mice and that live S bacteria could be retrieved from the dead mice. He concluded that molecules from the dead S cells had genetically transformed living R bacteria into S bacteria.

Griffith's work set the stage for a 14-year search for the identity of the transforming substance by American bacteriologist Oswald Avery. Avery purified various chemicals from the heat-killed pathogenic bacteria, then tried to transform live nonpathogenic bacteria with each chemical. Only DNA worked. Finally, in 1944, Avery and his colleagues Maclyn McCarty and Colin MacLeod announced that the transforming agent was DNA. Their discovery was greeted with considerable skepticism, in part because of the lingering belief that proteins were better candidates for the genetic material. Moreover, many biologists were not convinced that the genes of bacteria would be similar in composition and function to those of more complex organisms. But the major reason for the continued doubt was that so little was known about DNA. No one could imagine how DNA could carry genetic information.

Evidence That Viral DNA Can Program Cells

Additional evidence for DNA as the genetic material came from studies of a virus that infects bacteria. Viruses are much simpler than cells. A virus is little more than DNA (or sometimes RNA) enclosed by a protective coat of protein. To reproduce, a virus must infect a cell and take over the cell's metabolic machinery.

Viruses that infect bacteria are widely used as research tools in molecular genetics. These viruses are called bacteriophages (meaning "bacteria eaters"), or just phages. In 1952, Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase performed experiments showing that DNA is the genetic material of a phage known as T2. This is one of many phages that infect Escherichia coli (E. coli), a bacterium that normally lives in the intestines of mammals. At that time, biologists already knew that T2, like many other viruses, was composed almost entirely of DNA and protein. They also knew that the phage could quickly turn an E. coli cell into a T2-producing factory that released phages when the cell ruptured. Somehow, T2 could reprogram its host cell to produce viruses. But which viral component--protein or DNA--was responsible?

Hershey and Chase answered this question by devising an experiment showing that only one of the two components of T2 actually enters the E. coli cell during infection (FIGURE 16.2). In preparation for their experiment, they used different radioactive isotopes to tag phage DNA and protein. First, they grew T2 with E. coli in the presence of radioactive sulfur. Because protein, but not DNA, contains sulfur, the radioactive atoms were incorporated only into the protein of the phage. Next, in a similar way, the DNA of a separate batch of phage was labeled with atoms of radioactive phosphorus; because nearly all the phage's phosphorus is in its DNA, this procedure left the phage protein unlabeled. In the experiment, the protein-labeled and DNA-labeled batches of T2 were each allowed to infect separate samples of nonradioactive E. coli cells. Shortly after the onset of infection, the cultures were whirled in a kitchen blender to shake loose any parts of the phages that remained outside the bacterial cells. The mixtures were then spun in a centrifuge, forcing the bacterial cells to form a pellet at the bottom of the centrifuge tubes, but allowing free phages and parts of phages, which are lighter, to remain suspended in the liquid, or supernatant. The scientists then measured the radioactivity in the pellet and in the supernatant.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 16-2. The Hershey-Chase experiment. In their famous 1952 experiment, Hershey and Chase demonstrated that DNA, not protein, functions as the T2 phage's genetic material.

Hershey and Chase found that when the bacteria had been infected with the T2 phage containing radioactively labeled proteins, most of the radioactivity was found in the supernatant, which contained phage particles (but not bacteria). This result suggested that the protein of the phage did not enter the host cells. But when the bacteria had been infected with T2 phage whose DNA was tagged with radioactive phosphorus, then the pellet of mainly bacterial material contained most of the radio-activity. Moreover, when these bacteria were returned to a culture medium, the infection ran its course, and the E. coli released phages that contained some radioactive phosphorus.

Hershey and Chase concluded that the DNA of the virus is injected into the host cell during infection, leaving the protein outside. The injected DNA provides genetic information that makes the cells produce new viral DNA and proteins, which assemble into new viruses. Thus, the Hershey-Chase experiment provided powerful evidence that nucleic acids, rather than proteins, are the hereditary material, at least for viruses.

Additional Evidence That DNA Is the Genetic Material of Cells

Additional circumstantial evidence pointed to DNA as the genetic material in eukaryotes. Prior to mitosis, a eukaryotic cell exactly doubles its DNA content, and during mitosis, this DNA is distributed exactly equally to the two daughter cells. Also, diploid sets of chromosomes have twice as much DNA as the haploid sets found in the gametes of the same organism.

Still more evidence came from the laboratory of biochemist Erwin Chargaff. It was already known that DNA is a polymer of nucleotides, each consisting of three components: a nitrogenous (nitrogen-containing) base, a pentose sugar called deoxyribose, and a phosphate group. (See FIGURE 16.3 for review.) The base can be adenine (A), thymine (T), guanine (G), or cytosine (C). Chargaff analyzed the base composition of DNA from a number of different organisms. In 1947, he reported that DNA composition varies from one species to another: In the DNA of any one species, the amounts of the four nitrogenous bases are not all equal but are present in a characteristic ratio. Such evidence of molecular diversity, which had been presumed absent from DNA, made DNA a more credible candidate for the genetic material.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 16-3. The structure of a DNA strand. Each nucleotide unit of the polynucleotide chain consists of a nitrogenous base (T, A, C, or G), the sugar deoxyribose, and a phosphate group. The phosphate of one nucleotide is attached to the sugar of the next nucleotide in line. The result is a "backbone" of alternating phosphates and sugars, from which the bases project.

Chargaff also found a peculiar regularity in the ratios of nucleotide bases. In the DNA of each species he studied, the number of adenines approximately equaled the number of thymines, and the number of guanines approximately equaled the number of cytosines. In human DNA, for example, the four bases are present in these percentages: A = 30.9%  and T = 29.4% ; G = 19.9%  and C = 19.8% . The A = T and G = C equalities, later known as Chargaff's rules, remained unexplained until the discovery of the double helix.




