
 Phospholipids are major components of cell membranes

Phospholipids are similar to fats, but they have only two fatty acid tails rather than three. The third hydroxyl group of glycerol is joined to a phosphate group, which is negative in electrical charge. Additional small molecules, usually charged or polar, can be linked to the phosphate group to form a variety of phospholipids (FIGURE 5.12).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 5-12. The structure of a phospholipid. A phospholipid has a hydrophilic (polar) head and two hydrophobic tails. Phospholipid diversity is based on differences in the two fatty acid tails and in the groups attached to the phosphate group of the head. This particular phospholipid, called a phosphatidylcholine, has an attached choline group. The kink in one of its tails is due to a double bond. (a) The structural formula follows a common chemical convention of omitting the carbons and attached hydrogens of the hydrocarbon tails. (b) In the space-filling model, black = carbon, gray = hydrogen, red = oxygen, yellow = phosphorus, and blue = nitrogen. (c) This symbol for a phospholipid will appear throughout the book.

Phospholipids show ambivalent behavior toward water. Their tails, which consist of hydrocarbons, are hydrophobic and are excluded from water. However, the phosphate group and its attachments form a hydrophilic head that has an affinity for water.

When phospholipids are added to water, they self-assemble into aggregates that shield their hydrophobic portions from water. One kind of cluster is a micelle, a phospholipid droplet with the phosphate heads on the outside, in contact with water. The hydrocarbon tails are restricted to the water-free interior of the micelle (FIGURE 5.13a).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 5-13. Two structures formed by self-assembly of phospholipids in aqueous environments. The hydrophilic heads of the phospholipids are in contact with water, whereas the hydrophobic tails are in contact with each other and remote from water. (a) A micelle, in cross section. (b) A cross section of a phospholipid bilayer between two aqueous compartments. Such bilayers are the main fabric of biological membranes.

At the surface of a cell, phospholipids are arranged in a bilayer, or double layer (FIGURE 5.13b). The hydrophilic heads of the molecules are on the outside of the bilayer, in contact with the aqueous solutions inside and outside the cell. The hydrophobic tails point toward the interior of the membrane, away from the water. The phospholipid bilayer forms a boundary between the cell and its external environment; in fact, phospholipids are major components of cell membranes. This behavior provides another example of how form fits function at the molecular level.




