
Chapter 31: FUNGI

INTRODUCTION TO THE FUNGI

   Absorptive nutrition enables fungi to live as decomposers and symbionts

   Extensive surface area and rapid growth adapt fungi for absorptive nutrition

   Fungi disperse and reproduce by releasing spores that are produced either sexually or asexually

   Many fungi have a heterokaryotic stage



DIVERSITY OF FUNGI

   Phylum Chytridiomycota: Chytrids may provide clues about fungal origins

   Phylum Zygomycota: Zygote fungi form resistant structures during sexual reproduction

   Phylum Ascomycota: Sac fungi produce sexual spores in saclike asci

   Phylum Basidiomycota: Club fungi have long-lived dikaryotic mycelia

   Molds, yeasts, lichens, and mycorrhizae are specialized lifestyles that evolved independently in diverse fungal phyla



ECOLOGICAL IMPACTS OF FUNGI

   Ecosystems depend on fungi as decomposers and symbionts

   Some fungi are pathogens

   Fungi are commercially important



EVOLUTION OF FUNGI

   Fungi colonized land with plants

   Fungi and animals evolved from a common protistan ancestor

The words fungus and mold may evoke some unpleasant images. Fungi rot timbers, attack living plants, spoil food, and afflict humans with athlete's foot and worse maladies. However, ecosystems would be in trouble without fungi to decompose dead organisms, fallen leaves, feces, and other organic materials, thus recycling vital chemical elements back to the environment in forms other organisms can assimilate. Most plants depend on mutualistic fungi that help their roots absorb minerals and water from the soil. In addition to these ecological roles, fungi have been used by humans in various ways for centuries. We eat some fungi (mushrooms, for instance), culture fungi to produce antibiotics and other drugs, add them to dough to make bread rise, and use them to ferment beer and wine. Many fungi are also quite colorful and beautiful, as you can see from Mary Elizabeth Banning's 19th-century watercolor of indigo milk cap (Lactarius indigo). Whatever our initial subjective perceptions may be, fungi are fascinating as objects of study. They are a form of life so distinctive that they have been accorded their own taxonomic kingdom.

In this chapter we will characterize the members of the kingdom Fungi, survey their diversity, discuss their ecological and commercial impact, and consider hypotheses about their evolutionary origin. As we did with the plant kingdom, we will look in some detail at life cycles, mainly for what they tell us about the phylogeny and evolutionary adaptations of fungi.




