
 Extensive surface area and rapid growth adapt fungi for absorptive nutrition

The vegetative (nutritionally active) bodies of most fungi are usually hidden, being diffusely organized around and within the tissues of their food sources. Except for yeasts, which are unicellular, the bodies of fungi are constructed of tiny filaments called hyphae (singular, hypha). Hyphae are composed of tubular walls surrounding plasma membranes and cytoplasm. The hyphae form an interwoven mat called a mycelium (plural, mycelia), the "feeding" network of a fungus (FIGURE 31.1).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 31-1. Fungal mycelia.

Fungal mycelia can be huge, although they usually escape our notice--because they are subterranean, for instance. In 2000, scientists discovered the mycelium of one giant individual of the fungus Armillaria ostoyae in Oregon that is 3.4 miles in diameter and spreads through 2,200 acres of forest, equivalent to over 1,600 football fields. This fungus is at least 2,400 years old and hundreds of tons in weight, qualifying it as one of Earth's oldest and largest organisms.

Most fungi are multicellular with hyphae divided into cells by cross-walls, or septa (singular, septum). The septa generally have pores large enough to allow ribosomes, mitochondria, and even nuclei to flow from cell to cell (FIGURE 31.2a, p. 618). The cell walls of fungi differ from the cellulose walls of plants. Most fungi build their cell walls mainly of chitin, a strong but flexible nitrogen-containing polysaccharide identical to the chitin found in the external skeletons of insects and other arthropods. Some fungi are aseptate; that is, their hyphae are not divided into cells by cross-walls. Known as coenocytic fungi, they consist of a continuous cytoplasmic mass with hundreds or thousands of nuclei (FIGURE 31.2b). The coenocytic condition results from the repeated division of nuclei without cytoplasmic division. Parasitic fungi usually have some of their hyphae modified as haustoria, nutrient-absorbing hyphal tips that penetrate the tissues of the host (FIGURE 31.2c). There are even fungi with hyphae adapted for preying on animals (FIGURE 31.2d).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 31-2. Examples of fungal hyphae.

The correlation between structure and function is a fundamental theme of biology. The filamentous structure of the mycelium provides an extensive surface area that suits the absorptive nutrition of fungi. Ten cubic centimeters of rich organic soil may contain as much as 1 km of hyphae having a fungal surface area of over 300 cm2 interfacing with the soil.

A fungal mycelium grows rapidly, adding as much as a kilometer of hyphae each day as it branches throughout a food source. Such fast growth is possible because proteins and other materials synthesized by the entire mycelium are channeled by cytoplasmic streaming to the tips of the extending hyphae. The fungus concentrates its energy and resources on adding hyphal length and thus overall absorptive surface area, rather than girth. Fungal mycelia are nonmotile; they cannot run, swim, or fly in search of food or mates. But the mycelium makes up for the lack of mobility by swiftly extending the tips of its hyphae into new territory.




