
 The human population is disrupting chemical cycles throughout the biosphere

Human activity often intrudes in nutrient cycles by removing nutrients from one part of the biosphere and adding them to another. This may result in the depletion of key nutrients in one area, excesses in another place, and the disruption of the natural chemical cycles in both locations. For example, nutrients in the soil of croplands soon appear in the wastes of humans and livestock. Then they appear in streams and lakes through runoff from fields and sewage discharge. Someone eating a piece of broccoli in Washington, DC, is consuming nutrients that only days before might have been in the soil in California; and a short time later, some of these nutrients will be in the Potomac River on their way to the sea, having passed through an individual's digestive system and the local sewage facilities.

Humans have intruded on nutrient cycles to such an extent that it is no longer possible to understand any cycle without taking human effects into account. In addition to transporting nutrients from one location to another, we have added entirely new materials, many of them toxic, to ecosystems. Let's examine a few specific examples of how humans are impacting the biosphere's chemical dynamics.

Agricultural Effects on Nutrient Cycling

After natural vegetation is cleared from an area, crops may be grown for some time using the existing reserve of nutrients in the soil; nutrient supplementation isn't required. However, in agricultural ecosystems, a substantial fraction of these nutrients is not recycled but is exported from the area in the form of crop biomass (FIGURE 54.22). The "free" period for crop production--when there is no need to add nutrients to the soil--varies greatly. When some of the early North American prairie lands were first tilled, for example, good crops could be produced for many years because the large store of organic materials in the soil continued to decompose and provide nutrients. By contrast, some cleared land in the tropics can be farmed for only one or two years because so few of the ecosystems' nutrients are contained in the soil (see p. 1213). Eventually, in any area under intensive agriculture, the natural store of nutrients becomes exhausted. When this happens, fertilizer must be added. The industrially synthesized fertilizers used extensively today come from oil and are produced at considerable expense of both money and energy.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 54-22. Agricultural impact on soil nutrients. Transport of harvested plant biomass to market removes mineral nutrients that would otherwise be cycled back to the local soil. To replace the lost nutrients, farmers must apply fertilizers--either organic fertilizers, such as manure or mulch, or manufactured fertilizers.

Agriculture has a great impact on the nitrogen cycle. Cultivation--breaking up and mixing the soil--increases the rate of decomposition of organic matter, releasing usable nitrogen that is then removed from the ecosystem when crops are harvested. As we saw in the case of Hubbard Brook, ecosystems from which living plants are removed lose nitrogen not only because it is removed with the plants themselves, but because without plants to take them up, nitrates continue to be leached from the ecosystem. Industrially synthesized fertilizer is used to make up for the loss of usable nitrogen from agricultural ecosystems.

Recent studies indicate that human activities have approximately doubled the globe's supply of fixed nitrogen available to primary producers. The main cause is industrial nitrogen fixation for fertilizers, but increased cultivation of legumes, with their nitrogen-fixing symbionts, and burning are also important. (Fire releases nitrogen compounds stored in soil and vegetation, thereby enhancing the cycling of nitrogen compounds available to photosynthesizers.) In addition to its effects on local soil and water chemistry, the excessive supplements of fixed nitrogen are also associated with a greater release of N2 and nitrogen oxides into the air by denitrifying bacteria (see FIGURE 54.18). Nitrogen oxides can contribute to atmospheric warming, to the depletion of atmospheric ozone, and in some ecosystems to acid precipitation.

Critical Load and Nutrient Cycles

Excesses of nitrogenous minerals in the soil eventually leach into groundwater or run off directly into freshwater and marine ecosystems. Many rivers contaminated with nitrates and ammonium from agricultural runoff and sewage drain into the North Atlantic Ocean, with the highest nitrogen inputs to the ocean coming from northern Europe. Throughout the Northern Hemisphere, nitrate concentrations in rivers are rising in proportion to human population along the rivers. For example, nitrate levels in the Mississippi River have more than doubled since 1965. Groundwater concentrations of nitrate are also increasing in agricultural areas, sometimes exceeding the maximum level considered safe for drinking water (10 mg of nitrate per liter).

In certain situations, the addition of nitrogen to ecosystems by human activities can actually have positive effects, at least from the human perspective. Adding nitrogenous fertilizers can offset the nitrogen limitation of primary production that is common in terrestrial ecosystems. For example, in Swedish forests, which are nitrogen limited, agricultural runoff of nitrates and ammonia and emissions of nitrogenous compounds from factories are correlated with a 30%  boost in the growth rates of trees during the past 50 years. In other words, humans have been inadvertently fertilizing the forests.

The key issue seems to be critical load, the amount of added nitrogen that can be absorbed by plants without damaging ecosystem integrity. It is the nitrogen that exceeds critical load that turns up in groundwater and aquatic ecosystems such as lakes, a problem we examine in more detail next.

Accelerated Eutrophication of Lakes

As we discussed in Chapter 50, lakes are classified on a scale of increasing nutrient availability as oligotrophic, mesotrophic, or eutrophic (see FIGURE 50.19). In an oligotrophic lake, primary productivity is relatively low because the mineral nutrients required by phytoplankton are scarce. In other lakes, basin and watershed characteristics result in the addition of more nutrients. These nutrients are captured by the primary producers and then continuously recycled through the lake's food webs. Thus, the overall productivity is higher in mesotrophic lakes and highest in eutrophic (from the Greek, meaning "well nourished") ones.

Human intrusion has disrupted freshwater ecosystems by what is termed cultural eutrophication. Sewage and factory wastes; runoff of animal waste from pastures and stockyards; and the leaching of fertilizer from agricultural, recreational, and urban areas has overloaded many streams, rivers, and lakes with inorganic nutrients. This enrichment often results in an explosive increase in the density of photosynthetic organisms (see FIGURE 54.8). Shallower areas become weed choked, making boating and fishing impossible. Large "blooms" of algae and cyanobacteria become common, sometimes resulting in increased oxygen production during the day but reduced oxygen levels at night because of respiration by these large populations of organisms. As the photosynthetic organisms die and organic material accumulates at the lake bottom, detritivores use all the oxygen in the deeper waters. All these effects may make it impossible for some organisms to survive. For example, cultural eutrophication of Lake Erie wiped out commercially important fishes such as blue pike, whitefish, and lake trout by the 1960s. Since then, tighter regulations on the dumping of wastes into the lake have enabled some fish populations to rebound, but many of the native species of fishes and invertebrates have not recovered. Government policies to ensure better water quality should be a high priority in all countries.




