
 Lymphocytes provide the specificity and diversity of the immune system

The vertebrate body is populated by two main types of lymphocytes: B lymphocytes (B cells) and T lymphocytes (T cells). Like macrophages, both types of lymphocytes circulate throughout the blood and lymph and are concentrated in the spleen, lymph nodes, and other lymphatic tissues (see FIGURE 43.4). Because lymphocytes recognize and respond to particular microbes and foreign molecules, they are said to display specificity. A foreign molecule that elicits a specific response by lymphocytes is called an antigen. Antigens include molecules belonging to viruses, bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and parasitic worms. Antigenic molecules are also found on the surfaces of foreign materials such as pollen and transplanted tissue. B cells and T cells specialize in different types of antigens, and they carry out different, but complementary, defensive actions, as we will see later. One way that an antigen elicits an immune response is by activating B cells to secrete proteins called antibodies. The term antigen is a contraction of antibody-generator: Each antigen has a particular molecular shape and stimulates certain B cells to secrete antibodies that interact specifically with it. In fact, B and T cells can distinguish among antigens with molecular shapes that are only slightly different. So, in contrast to the nonspecific defenses, the immune system targets specific invaders.

The means by which B cells and T cells recognize specific antigens are their plasma membrane-bound antigen receptors. Antigen receptors on a B cell are actually transmembrane versions of antibody molecules and are often referred to as membrane antibodies (or membrane immunoglobulins). The antigen receptors on a T cell, called T cell receptors, are structurally related to membrane antibodies, and they recognize antigens just as specifically. But, unlike antibodies, T cell receptors are never produced in a secreted form. A single T or B lymphocyte bears about 100,000 receptors for antigen, all with exactly the same specificity. The particular structure of a lymphocyte's receptors is determined by genetic events that occur in the lymphocyte during its early development (see FIGURE 19.6). As an unspecialized cell differentiates into a B or T lymphocyte, segments of antibody genes or receptor genes are linked together by a type of genetic recombination, generating a single functional gene for each polypeptide of an antibody or receptor protein. This process, which occurs before any contact with foreign antigens, creates an enormous variety of B and T cells in the body, each bearing antigen receptors of particular specificity. With this diversity of lymphocytes, the immune system has the capacity to respond to millions of different antigenic molecules (even ones that do not yet exist)--and thus to millions of different potential pathogens.




