
Chapter 17: FROM GENE TO PROTEIN

THE CONNECTION BETWEEN GENES AND PROTEINS

   The study of metabolic defects provided evidence that genes specify proteins

   Transcription and translation are the two main processes linking gene to protein: an overview

   In the genetic code, nucleotide triplets specify amino acids

   The genetic code must have evolved very early in the history of life



THE SYNTHESIS AND PROCESSING OF RNA

   Transcription is the DNA-directed synthesis of RNA: a closer look

   Eukaryotic cells modify RNA after transcription



THE SYNTHESIS OF PROTEIN

   Translation is the RNA-directed synthesis of a polypeptide: a closer look

   Signal peptides target some eukaryotic polypeptides to specific destinations in the cell

   RNA plays multiple roles in the cell: a review

   Comparing protein synthesis in prokaryotes and eukaryotes: a review

   Point mutations can affect protein structure and function

   What is a gene? revisiting the question

The information content of DNA, the genetic material, is in the form of specific sequences of nucleotides along the DNA strands. But how is this information related to an organism's inherited traits? Put another way, what does a gene actually say? And how is its message translated by cells into a specific trait, such as brown hair or type A blood?

Consider, once again, Mendel's peas. One of the characters Mendel studied was stem length (seeTABLE 14.1). Variation in a single gene accounts for the difference between the tall and dwarf varieties of pea plants. Mendel did not know the physiological basis of this phenotypic difference, but plant scientists have since worked out the explanation: Dwarf peas lack growth hormones called gibberellins, which stimulate the normal elongation of stems. A dwarf plant treated with gibberellins grows to normal height. Why do dwarf peas fail to make their own gibberellins? They are missing a key protein, an enzyme required for gibberellin synthesis. This example illustrates the main point of this chapter: The DNA inherited by an organism leads to specific traits by dictating the synthesis of proteins. Proteins are the links between genotype and phenotype. This chapter explores the flow of information from genes to proteins.




