
 Nearly all prokaryotes have a cell wall external to the plasma membrane

Present in nearly all prokaryotes, the cell wall maintains the shape of the cell, affords physical protection, and prevents the cell from bursting in a hypotonic environment (see Chapter 8). Like other walled cells, however, prokaryotes plasmolyze (shrink away from their wall) and may die in a hypertonic medium, which is why heavily salted meat can be kept so long without being spoiled by prokaryotes. The cell walls of prokaryotes differ in molecular composition and construction from those of plants, fungi, and protists.

The presence of a cell wall is one reason prokaryotes were grouped with plants in the old two-kingdom system. Instead of cellulose, the staple of plant walls, most bacterial walls contain a unique material called peptidoglycan, which consists of polymers of modified sugars cross-linked by short polypeptides that vary from species to species (the walls of archaea lack peptidoglycan). The effect is a single molecular network enclosing and protecting the entire cell. External to this fabric are other substances that also differ from species to species.

One of the most valuable tools for identifying specific bacteria is the Gram stain, which can be used to separate many species into two groups based on differences in their cell walls. Gram-positive bacteria have simpler walls, with a relatively large amount of peptidoglycan. The walls of gram-negative bacteria have less peptidoglycan and are structurally more complex. An outer membrane on the gram-negative cell wall contains lipopolysaccharides, carbohydrates bonded to lipids (FIGURE 27.5).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 27-5. Gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. Gram-staining, named for Hans Christian Gram, a Danish physician who developed the technique in the late 1800s, dis tinguishes between two different kinds of bacterial cell walls. Bacteria are stained with a violet dye and iodine, rinsed in alcohol, and then stained again with a red dye. The structure of the cell wall determines the staining response. (The colors in the diagrams do not represent the stains.)

Among pathogenic, or disease-causing, bacteria, gram-negative species are generally more threatening than gram-positive species. The lipopolysaccharides on the walls of gram-negative bacteria are often toxic, and the outer membrane helps protect the pathogens against the defenses of their hosts. Furthermore, gram-negative bacteria are commonly more resistant than gram-positive species to antibiotics because the outer membrane impedes entry of the drugs.

Many antibiotics, including penicillins, inhibit the synthesis of cross-links in peptidoglycan and prevent the formation of a functional wall, particularly in gram-positive species. These drugs are like selective bullets that cripple many species of infectious bacteria without adversely affecting humans and other eukaryotes, which do not make peptidoglycan.

Many prokaryotes secrete sticky substances that form still another protective layer called a capsule outside the cell wall. Capsules enable the organisms to adhere to their substratum and provide additional protection, including increased resistance of pathogenic prokaryotes to host defenses. Gelatinous capsules glue together the cells of many prokaryotes that live as colonies.

Another way some prokaryotes adhere to one another or to some substratum is by means of surface appendages called pili (singular, pilus; FIGURE 27.6, p. 530). For example, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, the pathogen that causes gonorrhea, uses pili to fasten itself to mucous membranes of its host. Some pili are specialized for holding prokaryotes together long enough for the cells to transfer DNA during conjugation (see Chapter 18).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 27-6. Pili. These appendages enable some prokaryotes to attach to surfaces or to other prokaryotes (colorized TEM). Some pili function during conjugation, holding partners together while DNA is transferred (see FIGURE 18.14).




