
 Phylum Mollusca: Mollusks have a muscular foot, a visceral mass, and a mantle

Snails and slugs, oysters and clams, and octopuses and squids are all mollusks. In all, the phylum Mollusca has more than 150,000 known species. Most mollusks are marine, though some inhabit fresh water, and there are snails and slugs that live on land. Mollusks are soft-bodied animals (from the Latin molluscus, soft), but most are protected by a hard shell made of calcium carbonate. Slugs, squids, and octopuses have reduced shells, most of which are internal, or they have lost their shells completely during their evolution.

Despite their apparent differences, all mollusks have a similar body plan (FIGURE 33.16). The body has three main parts: a muscular foot, usually used for movement; a visceral mass containing most of the internal organs; and a mantle, a fold of tissue that drapes over the visceral mass and secretes a shell (if one is present). In many mollusks, the mantle extends beyond the visceral mass, producing a water-filled chamber, the mantle cavity, which houses the gills, anus, and excretory pores. Many mollusks feed by using a straplike rasping organ called a radula to scrape up food.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-16. The basic body plan of mollusks. Three hallmarks of the phylum are the mantle, visceral mass, and foot. A mantle cavity houses gills in many species. The long digestive tract is coiled in the visceral mass. Most mollusks have an open circulatory system with a dorsal heart that pumps circulatory fluid (hemolymph) through arteries into sinuses (body spaces) bathing the organs. Excretory organs called nephridia remove metabolic wastes from the hemolymph. The nervous system consists of a nerve ring around the esophagus, from which nerve cords extend. The enlargement shows the mouth region with the radula, a rasplike feeding organ present in many mollusks. The radula is a belt of backward-curved teeth that extends from the mouth and slides back and forth, scraping and scooping like a backhoe.

Most mollusks have separate sexes, with gonads (ovaries or testes) located in the visceral mass. Many snails, however, are hermaphrodites. The life cycle of many marine mollusks includes a ciliated larva called the trochophore, also characteristic of marine annelids (segmented worms) and some other lophotrochozoans (see FIGURE 32.9).

The basic body plan of mollusks has evolved in various ways in the different classes of the phylum. Of the eight classes, we examine four here: Polyplacophora (chitons), Gastropoda (snails and slugs), Bivalvia (clams, oysters, and other bivalves), and Cephalopoda (squids, octopuses, and nautiluses) (TABLE 33.3).

Table 33-3. Major Classes of Phylum Mollusca

Class and ExamplesMain CharacteristicsPolyplacophora (chitons)(see FIGURE 33.17)Marine; shell with eight plates; foot used for locomotion; head reducedGastropoda (snails, slugs) (see FIGURES 33.18 and 33.19)Marine, freshwater, or terrestrial; asymmetric body, usually with a coiled shell; shell reduced or absent in some; foot for locomotion; radula presentBivalvia (clams, mussels, scallops, oysters) (see FIGURES 33.20 and 33.21)Marine and freshwater, flattened shell with two valves; head reduced; paired gills; most are filter-feeders; mantle forms siphonsCephalopoda (squids, octopuses, chambered nautiluses) (see FIGURE 33.22)Marine; head surrounded by grasping tentacles, usually with suckers; shell external, internal, or absent; mouth with or without radula; locomotion by jet propulsion using siphon made from mantleClass Polyplacophora

Chitons are marine animals with oval shapes and shells divided into eight dorsal plates (the body itself, however, is unsegmented). You can find chitons clinging to rocks along the shore during low tide (FIGURE 33.17). Try to dislodge a chiton by hand, and you will be surprised at how well its foot, acting as a suction cup, grips the rock. Using this muscular foot, a chiton can creep slowly over the rock surface. Chitons are grazers that use their radulas to cut and ingest algae.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-17. A chiton. Clinging tenaciously to rocks in the intertidal zone, this chiton (class Polyplacophora) displays the eight-plate shell characteristic of this class of mollusks.

Class Gastropoda

The largest of the molluscan classes, Gastropoda has more than 40,000 living species. Most gastropods are marine, but there are also many freshwater species. Garden snails and slugs have adapted to land.

The most distinctive characteristic of the class Gastropoda is a process known as torsion. During embryonic development, an asymmetrical muscle forms, and contraction of the muscle and uneven growth causes the visceral mass to rotate up to 180 degrees, so that the anus and mantle cavity are placed above the head in the adult (FIGURE 33.18). Some zoologists speculate that the advantage of torsion is to place the visceral mass and heavy shell more centrally over the snail's body.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-18. The results of torsion in a gastropod. Because of torsion (twisting of the visceral mass) during embryonic development, the digestive tract is coiled and the anus is near the mouth at the head end of the animal. After torsion, some of the organs that were bilateral are reduced in size or are lost on one side of the body. Torsion should not be confused with the formation of a coiled shell, which is an independent developmental process.

Most gastropods are protected by single, spiraled shells into which the animals can retreat when threatened (FIGURE 33.19). The shell is often conical, but abalones and limpets have somewhat flattened shells. Many gastropods have distinct heads with eyes at the tips of tentacles. Gastropods inch along literally at a snail's pace by a rippling motion of the elongated foot. Most gastropods use their radula to graze on algae or plant material. Several groups, however, are predators, and the radula is modified for boring holes in the shells of other mollusks or for tearing apart tough animal tissue. In one group, the cone snails, the teeth of the radula form separate poison darts, which penetrate prey, including fishes.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-19. Gastropods. (a) Gastropod shells. Shell collectors find delight in the variety of Gastropoda, one of the most diverse animal classes. (b) Sea slug. Nudibranchs, or sea slugs, have lost the shell during their evolution.

Gastropods are among the few invertebrate groups to have successfully populated the land. Terrestrial snails lack the gills typical of most aquatic gastropods, and instead the lining of the mantle cavity functions as a lung, exchanging respiratory gases with the air.

Class Bivalvia

The mollusks of class Bivalvia include many species of clams, oysters, mussels, and scallops. Bivalves have shells divided into two halves (FIGURE 33.20). The two parts of the shell are hinged at the mid-dorsal line, and powerful adductor muscles draw the two halves tightly together to protect the soft-bodied animal. When the shell is open, the bivalve may extend its hatchet-shaped foot for digging or anchoring.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-20. A bivalve. This scallop has many eyes peering out between the two halves of the hinged shell.

The mantle cavity of a bivalve contains gills that are used for feeding as well as gas exchange (FIGURE 33.21). Most bivalves are suspension-feeders. They trap fine food particles in mucus that coats the gills, and cilia then convey the particles to the mouth. Water flows into the mantle cavity through an incurrent siphon, passes over the gills, and then exits the mantle cavity through an excurrent siphon. Bivalves have no distinct head, and the radula has been lost.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-21. Anatomy of a clam. The left half of the bivalve shell has been removed. Food particles suspended in water that enters through the incurrent siphon are collected by the gills and passed via cilia and elongated flaps called palps to the mouth.

Being suspension-feeders, most bivalves lead rather sedentary lives. Sessile mussels secrete strong threads that tether them to rocks, docks, boats, and the shells of other animals. Clams can pull themselves into the sand or mud, using the muscular foot for an anchor. In addition to digging, scallops can also skitter along the seafloor by flapping their shells, rather like the mechanical false teeth sold in novelty shops.

Class Cephalopoda

Cephalopods are built for speed, an adaptation that fits their carnivorous diet. Squids and octopuses use beaklike jaws to bite their prey; they then inject poison to immobilize the victim. The mouth is at the center of several long tentacles. A mantle covers the visceral mass, but the shell is reduced and internal (squids) or missing altogether (many octopuses) (FIGURES 33.22a and b). One small group of shelled cephalopods, the chambered nautiluses, survives today (FIGURE 33.22c).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-22. Cephalopods. (a) Squids, such as this California market squid (Loligo opalescens), are speedy carnivores with beaklike jaws and well-developed eyes. (b) Octopuses are believed to be among the most intelligent invertebrates. (c) Chambered nautiluses are the only extant cephalopods with external shells.

A squid darts about, usually backward, by drawing water into its mantle cavity and then firing a jet stream of water through the excurrent siphon that points anteriorly. The animal steers by pointing the siphon in different directions. The foot of a cephalopod has become modified into this muscular siphon and parts of the tentacles and head. (Cephalopod means "head foot.") Most species of squid are less than 75 cm long, but there are also giant squids, the largest of all invertebrates. The biggest specimen on record was 17 m long (including the tentacles) and weighed about 2 tons.

Rather than swimming as squids do in the open seas, most octopuses live on the seafloor, where they creep and scurry about in search of crabs and other food.

Cephalopods are the only mollusks with a closed circulatory system. They also have a well-developed nervous system with a complex brain. The ability to learn and behave in a complex manner is probably more critical to fast-moving predators than to sedentary animals such as clams. Squids and octopuses also have well-developed sense organs.

The ancestors of octopuses and squids were probably shelled mollusks that took up a predaceous lifestyle, the loss of the shell occurring in later evolution. Shelled cephalopods called ammonites, some of them as large as truck tires, were the dominant invertebrate predators of the seas for hundreds of millions of years until their disappearance during the mass extinctions at the end of the Cretaceous period (see Chapter 25).




