
 The hypothalamus and pituitary integrate many functions of the vertebrate endocrine system

The hypothalamus plays an important role in integrating the vertebrate endocrine and nervous systems. This region of the lower brain receives information from nerves throughout the body and from other parts of the brain, then initiates endocrine signals appropriate to environmental conditions. In many vertebrates, for example, the brain passes sensory information about seasonal changes and the availability of a mate to the hypothalamus by means of nerve signals; the hypothalamus then triggers the release of reproductive hormones required for breeding.

The hormone-releasing cells in the hypothalamus are two sets of neurosecretory cells whose secretions are stored in or regulate the activity of the pituitary gland, a small organ with multiple endocrine functions. The pituitary gland was formerly called the "master gland" because so many of its hormones regulate other endocrine functions. However, the pituitary itself obeys hormonal orders from the hypothalamus.

No organ illustrates the close structural, functional, and developmental relationships of the endocrine and nervous systems better than the pituitary gland. Located at the base of the hypothalamus, it has two discrete parts that develop from two separate regions of the embryo and have very different functions (FIGURE 45.6). The anterior pituitary, or adenohypophysis, develops from a fold of tissue at the roof of the embryonic mouth that grows upward toward the brain and eventually loses its connection to the mouth. The anterior pituitary consists of endocrine cells that synthesize and secrete several hormones directly into the blood. A set of neurosecretory cells in the hypothalamus exerts control over the anterior pituitary by secreting two kinds of hormones into the blood. Releasing hormones make the anterior pituitary secrete its hormones. Inhibiting hormones from the hypothalamus make the anterior pituitary stop secreting hormone.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 45-6. Hormones of the hypothalamus and pituitary glands. The pituitary gland, located at the base of the brain and surrounded by bone, consists of the posterior pituitary (neurohypophysis) and the anterior pituitary (adenohypophysis). Note that the posterior pituitary is actually an extension of the hypothalamus.

The hypothalamic releasing and inhibiting hormones are released into capillaries in a region at the base of the hypothalamus (FIGURE 45.6b). The capillaries drain into portal vessels, which are short blood vessels that subdivide into a second capillary bed within the anterior pituitary. In this way, the hypothalamic hormones have direct access to the gland they control. Every anterior pituitary hormone is controlled by at least one releasing hormone, and some have both a releasing hormone and an inhibiting hormone.

Unlike the anterior pituitary, the posterior pituitary, or neurohypophysis, is an extension of the brain. It develops from a small bulge of the hypothalamus that grows downward toward the mouth fold that forms the anterior pituitary. The posterior pituitary remains an extension of the hypothalamus. It stores and secretes two hormones that are made by a set of neurosecretory cells in the hypothalamus.

Posterior Pituitary Hormones

The two hormones released by the posterior pituitary, oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone (ADH), are made by the hypothalamus. Oxytocin acts on muscles of the uterus and ADH acts on the kidneys, rather than affecting other endocrine glands. Oxytocin induces contraction of the uterine muscles during childbirth and causes the mammary glands to eject milk during nursing. ADH acts on the kidneys, increasing water retention and thus decreasing urine volume.

Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) is part of an elaborate feedback scheme that helps regulate the osmolarity of the blood. This mechanism was introduced in Chapter 44, but it is worth reviewing here to illustrate how hormones contribute to homeostasis and how negative feedback controls hormone levels. Blood osmolarity is monitored by a group of nerve cells that function as osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus. When the osmolarity of the plasma increases, these cells shrink slightly (due to osmosis) and transmit nerve impulses to certain neurosecretory cells in the hypothalamus. These cells respond by releasing ADH from their tips, which are located in the posterior pituitary. The posterior pituitary stores ADH and releases it into the general circulation. When ADH reaches the kidneys, it binds to receptors on the surface of the cells lining the collecting ducts. This binding activates a signal-transduction pathway that increases the water permeability of the collecting duct. Water exits the collecting ducts and enters nearby capillaries, helping prevent a further increase in blood osmolarity above the set point. The brain's osmoreceptors also stimulate a thirst drive, and drinking water brings blood osmolarity back down to the set point. Thus, the hormonal reaction to high blood osmolarity is augmented by a behavioral response controlled by the nervous system. As the more dilute blood arrives at the brain, the hypothalamus responds to the reduction in osmolarity by slowing the release of ADH and diminishing the sensation of thirst. The effects of these hormonal and behavioral responses--increased water reabsorption in the kidneys and drinking, respectively--prevent overcompensation by shutting off further secretion of the hormone and quenching thirst. We see once again how negative feedback helps maintain homeostasis. This example also highlights the central role of the hypothalamus as a member of both the endocrine system and the nervous system.

Anterior Pituitary Hormones

The anterior pituitary produces many different hormones. Four of these are tropic hormones that stimulate the synthesis and release of hormones from other endocrine glands. Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) regulates the release of thyroid hormones; adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) controls the adrenal cortex; and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) govern reproduction by acting on the gonads. Other hormones produced by the anterior pituitary are growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL), melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH), and the endorphins.

Growth hormone (GH), a protein of about 200 amino acids, affects a wide variety of target tissues and has both direct effects and tropic effects. GH promotes growth directly and stimulates the production of growth factors. For example, the ability of GH to stimulate the growth of bones and cartilage is partly due to the hormone's signaling the liver to produce insulinlike growth factors (IGFs), which circulate in blood plasma and directly stimulate bone and cartilage growth. (This endocrine response to growth hormone qualifies GH as a tropic hormone. And IGF secretion by the liver qualifies that organ as an endocrine gland, among its many other functions.) In the absence of GH, skeletal growth of an immature animal will stop. If GH is injected into an animal that has been deprived of its own GH, growth will be partially restored.

Several human growth disorders are related to abnormal GH production. Excessive production of GH during development can lead to gigantism, while excessive GH production during adulthood results in the abnormal growth of bones in the hands, feet, and head, a condition known as acromegaly. Deficient GH production in childhood can lead to pituitary dwarfism. Children with GH deficiency have been treated successfully with human growth hormones isolated from cadaver pituitaries. However, the supply falls short of demand, and growth hormones from most other animals are ineffective. One of the most dramatic achievements of genetic engineering has been the production of GH by bacteria with genes for human GH spliced into their genomes (see Chapter 20). The product is now being used to treat children with hypopituitary dwarfism. Some athletes take GH (legally or illegally) to build muscles.

Prolactin (PRL) is a protein so similar to GH that it is believed that their genes that evolved from the same ancestral gene. The physiological roles of these two hormones, however, are different. Prolactin's most remarkable characteristic is the great diversity of effects it produces in different vertebrate species. For example, PRL stimulates mammary gland growth and milk synthesis in mammals; regulates fat metabolism and reproduction in birds; delays metamorphosis in amphibians, where it may also function as a larval growth hormone; and regulates salt and water balance in freshwater fishes. This list suggests that prolactin is an ancient hormone whose functions have diversified during the evolution of the various vertebrate classes.

Three of the tropic hormones secreted by the anterior pituitary are closely related chemically. Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) are all similar glycoproteins, protein molecules with carbohydrate attached to them. FSH and LH are also called gonadotropins because they stimulate the activities of the male and female gonads, the testes and ovaries. TSH stimulates the production of hormones by the thyroid gland.

The remaining hormones from the anterior pituitary are all made from a single parent molecule called pro-opiomelanocortin. This is a large protein that is cleaved into several short fragments inside anterior pituitary cells. At least three of these fragments are active peptide hormones. Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulates the production and secretion of steroid hormones by the adrenal cortex. As described earlier, melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH) regulates the activity of pigment-containing cells in the skin of some vertebrates. MSH secreted by the mammalian pituitary seems to play a key role in fat metabolism, probably by a feedback mechanism that targets neurons in the hypothalamus. The other derivatives of pro-opiomelanocortin are a class of hormones called endorphins. These molecules are also produced by certain neurons in the brain. They are sometimes called the body's natural opiates because they inhibit the perception of pain. In fact, heroin and other opiate drugs mimic endorphins and bind to the same receptors in the brain. Some researchers speculate that the so-called runner's high results partly from the release of endorphins when stress and pain in the body reach critical levels. (Endorphins are discussed further in Chapter 48.)




