
 Decomposition rates largely determine the rates of nutrient cycling

The rates at which nutrients cycle in different ecosystems are extremely variable, mostly as a result of differences in rates of decomposition. In tropical rain forests, most organic material decomposes in a few months to a few years, while in temperate forests, decomposition takes, on average, four to six years. In the tundra, decomposition can take 50 years, and in aquatic ecosystems, where most decomposition occurs in anaerobic bottom muds, it may occur even more slowly. The temperature and the availability of water and O2 all affect rates of decomposition and thus nutrient cycling times. Other factors that can influence nutrient cycling are local soil chemistry and the frequency of fires.

In some parts of a tropical rain forest, key nutrients such as phosphorus occur in the soil at levels far below those typical of a temperate forest. At first this might seem paradoxical because tropical forests generally have very high production. The key to this apparent riddle is rapid decomposition in tropical areas because of the warm temperatures and abundant precipitation. In addition, the immense biomass of these forests creates a high demand for nutrients, which are absorbed almost as soon as they become available through the action of decomposers. As a result of rapid decomposition, relatively little organic material accumulates as leaf litter on the floor of tropical rain forests; about 75%  of the nutrients in the ecosystem are present in the woody trunks of trees, and about 10%  are contained in the soil. Thus, the relatively low concentrations of some nutrients in the soil of tropical rain forests result from a fast cycling time, not an overall scantiness of these elements in the ecosystem.

In temperate forests, where decomposition is much slower, the soil may contain 50%  of all the organic material in the ecosystem. The nutrients present in temperate forest detritus and soil may remain there for fairly long periods of time before being assimilated by plants.

In aquatic ecosystems, bottom sediments are comparable to the detritus layer in terrestrial ecosystems, but algae and aquatic plants usually assimilate nutrients directly from the water. Thus, these sediments often constitute a nutrient sink, and aquatic ecosystems can only be very productive if there is interchange between the bottom layers of water and the surface (see FIGURE 50.16).




