
 Diverse mechanisms of asexual reproduction enable animals to produce identical offspring rapidly

Many invertebrates can reproduce asexually by fission, the separation of a parent into two or more individuals of approximately equal size (FIGURE 46.1). Also common among invertebrates, budding involves new individuals splitting off from existing ones. For example, in certain cnidarians and tunicates, new individuals grow out from the body of a parent (see FIGURE 13.1). The offspring may either detach from the parent or remain joined, eventually forming extensive colonies. Stony corals, which may be more than 1 m across, are cnidarian colonies of several thousand connected individuals. In another form of asexual reproduction, some invertebrates release specialized groups of cells that can grow into new individuals. For example, the gemmules of sponges are formed when cells of several types migrate together within the sponge and become surrounded by a protective coat.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 46-1. Two from one: asexual reproduction of a sea anemone (Anthopleura elegantissima). The individual in the center of this photograph is undergoing fission, a type of asexual reproduction. Two smaller individuals will soon form as the parent divides approximately in half. The offspring will be genetic copies of the parent.

Yet another type of asexual reproduction is fragmentation, the breaking of the body into several pieces, some or all of which develop into complete adults. For an animal to reproduce this way, fragmentation must be accompanied by regeneration, the regrowth of lost body parts. Reproduction by fragmentation and regeneration occurs in many sponges, cnidarians, polychaete annelids, and tunicates. Many animals can also replace lost appendages by regeneration--most sea stars can grow new arms when injured, for example--but this is not reproduction because new individuals are not created. In sea stars of the genus Linckia, a whole new individual may develop from an isolated arm. Thus, a single animal with five arms, if broken apart, could asexually give rise to five offspring.

Asexual reproduction has several potential advantages. For instance, it enables animals living in isolation to produce offspring without locating mates. It can also create numerous offspring in a short amount of time, which is ideal for colonizing a habitat rapidly. Theoretically, asexual reproduction is most advantageous in stable, favorable environments because it perpetuates successful genotypes precisely.




