
 A diversity of protists use pseudopodia for movement and feeding

The three groups we discuss in this section represent some of the immense diversity of eukaryotes that move and often feed by means of cellular extensions called pseudopodia. Most of these organisms are heterotrophs that actively seek and consume bacteria, other protists, and detritus (dead organic matter). There are also symbiotic species, including some parasites that cause human disease. We discuss these three groups together only for convenience. Little is known about their phylogeny, although it is clear that they represent several distinct eukaryotic lineages. Because of taxonomic uncertainties, we have not included these protists on the phylogenetic tree shown in FIGURE 28.8.

Rhizopoda (Amoebas)

Rhizopods, more often called amoebas, are all unicellular and use pseudopodia to move and to feed. You may have observed their mode of motility in Amoeba proteus in the laboratory (see FIGURE 28.1a). Pseudopodia may bulge from virtually anywhere on the cell surface. When an amoeba moves, it extends a pseudopodium and anchors its tip, and then more cytoplasm streams into the pseudopodium (rhizopoda means "rootlike feet"). The cytoskeleton, consisting of microtubules and microfilaments, functions in amoeboid movement (see FIGURE 7.27b). Pseudopodial activity may appear chaotic, but in fact amoebas show directed movement as they creep toward a food source (FIGURE 28.26). Some amoebas live inside a protein shell that they secrete. Pseudopodia extend outward through an opening in the shell, which in some species is coated with fine sand grains.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 28-26. Use of pseudopodia for feeding. In this series of images selected from a video, an Amoeba cell uses its pseudopodia to approach and then engulf its prey, a ciliate. Phagocytosis enables Amoeba to take in the ciliate and package it in a food vacuole, which will fuse with lysosomes containing digestive enzymes (see FIGURE 7.13).

Amoebas inhabit both freshwater and marine environments and are also abundant in soils. The majority of amoebas are free-living, but some are important parasites, including Entamoeba histolytica, which causes amoebic dysentery in humans. These organisms spread via contaminated drinking water, food, or eating utensils.

Actinopoda (Heliozoans and Radiolarians)

Actinopod means "ray foot," a reference to the slender pseudopodia called axopodia that radiate from these exceptionally beautiful protists (FIGURE 28.27). Each axopodium is reinforced by a bundle of microtubules covered by a thin layer of cytoplasm. Most actinopods are planktonic, and their projections place an extensive area of cellular surface in contact with the surrounding water, helping the organisms float and feed. Smaller protists and other microorganisms stick to the axopodia and are phagocytized by the thin layer of cytoplasm. Cytoplasmic streaming then carries the engulfed prey into the main part of the cell.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 28-27. Actinopods.

Most heliozoans ("sun animals") live in fresh water. Heliozoan skeletons consist of siliceous (glassy) or chitinous unfused plates. The term radiolarian refers to several groups of mostly marine actinopods with skeletons fused into one delicate piece, most commonly made of silica. After actinopods die, their skeletons settle to the seafloor, where they have accumulated as an ooze that is hundreds of meters thick in some locations.

Foraminifera (Forams)

Foraminiferans, or forams, are almost all marine. Most species live in the sand or attach themselves to rocks and algae, but some are also abundant in plankton. Foraminiferans are named for their porous shells (from the Latin foramen, little hole, and ferre, to bear). The shells are generally multichambered and consist of organic material hardened with calcium carbonate. Strands of cytoplasm (pseudopodia) extend through the pores, functioning in swimming, shell formation, and feeding (FIGURE 28.28). Many forams also derive nourishment from the photosynthesis of symbiotic algae that live within the shells.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 28-28. Foraminiferan. Globigerina has a snail-like shell. The largest forams, though single-celled, grow to diameters of several centimeters. The calcium carbonate shells of these protists have left an excellent fossil record in limestone sediments (LM).

Ninety percent of all identified species of forams are fossils. Along with the calcareous remains of other protists, the fossilized shells of forams are components of marine sediments, including sedimentary rocks that are now land formations. Foram fossils are excellent markers for correlating the ages of sedimentary rocks in different parts of the world.




