
 Spermatogenesis and oogenesis both involve meiosis but differ in three significant ways

Spermatogenesis, the production of mature sperm cells, is a continuous and prolific process in the adult male. Each ejaculation of a human male contains 100 to 650 million sperm cells, and males can ejaculate daily with little loss of fertilizing capacity.

Spermatogenesis occurs in the seminiferous tubules of the testes. FIGURE 46.11 describes the process in some detail. The stem cells that give rise to sperm, spermatogonia, are located at the periphery of each seminiferous tubule. The developing sperm cells move toward the central opening (lumen) of the tubule as they undergo meiosis and differentiation. The four cells that results from meiosis all develop into mature sperm cells.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 46-11. Spermatogenesis. These drawings correlate the meiotic stages in sperm development (left) with the structure of seminiferous tubules at the microscopic level. Primordial germ cells of the embryonic testes differentiate into spermatogonia, the stem cells that give rise to sperm. As spermatogonia differentiate into spermatocytes and then to spermatids, meiosis reduces the chromosome number from diploid (2n = 46 in humans) to haploid (n = 23). The developing cells are gradually pushed from a location near the outer wall of the seminiferous tubule toward the lumen (central opening) and make their way to the epididymis, where they become motile. This process, from spermatogonia to motile sperm, takes 65 to 75 days in the human male. In mature males, about 3 million spermatogonia start the process each day.

The structure of a sperm cell fits its function (FIGURE 46.12). In most species, a head containing the haploid nucleus is tipped with a special body, the acrosome, which contains enzymes that help the sperm penetrate the egg. Behind the head, the sperm cell contains large numbers of mitochondria (or a single large one, in some species) that provide ATP for movement of the tail, which is a flagellum. Mammalian sperm shape varies from species to species, with the head a slender comma shape, an oval form (as in the human sperm), or nearly spherical.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 46-12. Structure of a human sperm cell.

Oogenesis is the development of ova--mature, unfertilized egg cells. FIGURE 46.13, p. 986, shows the process and its location, the ovary. In the developing female embryo, oogonia, the stem cells that give rise to ova, multiply and then begin meiosis, but the process stops at prophase I. The cells at this stage, called primary oocytes, remain quiescent within small follicles until puberty, when they are reactivated by hormones. Beginning at puberty, FSH (follicle-stimulating hormone) periodically stimulates a follicle to grow and induces its primary oocyte to complete meiosis I and start meiosis II. Meiosis then stops again; the secondary oocyte, released during ovulation, does not continue meiosis II right away. In humans, penetration of the egg cell by the sperm triggers the completion of meiosis, and only then is oogenesis actually complete.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 46-13. Oogenesis.

Oogenesis differs from spermatogenesis in three major ways. First, during the meiotic divisions of oogenesis, cytokinesis is unequal, with almost all the cytoplasm monopolized by a single daughter cell, the secondary oocyte. This large cell can go on to form the ovum; the other products of meiosis, smaller cells called polar bodies, degenerate. This contrasts with spermatogenesis, when all four products of meiosis develop into mature sperm (compare FIGURES 46.11 and FIGURES 46.13). Second, while the cells from which sperm develop continue to divide by mitosis throughout the male's life, this is not the case for oogenesis in the female. At birth, an ovary already contains all the primary oocytes it will ever have. Third, oogenesis has long "resting" periods, in contrast to spermatogenesis, which produces mature sperm from precursor cells in an uninterrupted sequence.




