
 Fats store large amounts of energy

Although fats are not polymers, they are large molecules, and they are assembled from smaller molecules by dehydration reactions. A fat is constructed from two kinds of smaller molecules: glycerol and fatty acids (FIGURE 5.10). Glycerol is an alcohol with three carbons, each bearing a hydroxyl group. A fatty acid has a long carbon skeleton, usually 16 or 18 carbon atoms in length. At one end of the fatty acid is a carboxyl group, the functional group that gives these molecules the name fatty acids. Attached to the carboxyl group is a long hydrocarbon chain. The nonpolar C--H bonds in the hydrocarbon chains of fatty acids are the reason fats are hydrophobic. Fats separate from water because the water molecules hydrogen-bond to one another and exclude the fats. A common example of this phenomenon is the separation of vegetable oil (a liquid fat) from the aqueous vinegar solution in a bottle of salad dressing.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 5-10. The synthesis and structure of a fat, or triacylglycerol. The molecular building blocks of a fat are one molecule of glycerol and three molecules of fatty acids. (a) One water molecule is removed for each fatty acid joined to the glycerol. (b) The result is a fat. Although the fat shown here has three identical fatty acid units, other fats have two or even three different kinds of fatty acids. The carbons of the fatty acid chains are arranged zig-zag to suggest the actual orientations of the four single bonds extending from each carbon (see FIGURE 4.2).

In making a fat, three fatty acids each join to glycerol by an ester linkage, a bond between a hydroxyl group and a carboxyl group. The resulting fat, also called a triacylglycerol, thus consists of three fatty acids ("tails") linked to one glycerol molecule (the "head"). (Still another name for a fat is triglyceride, a word often found in the list of ingredients on packaged foods.) The fatty acids in a fat can be the same, as in FIGURE 5.10b, or they can be of two or three different kinds.

Fatty acids vary in length and in the number and locations of double bonds. The terms saturated fats and unsaturated fats are commonly used in the context of nutrition (FIGURE 5.11). These terms refer to the structure of the hydrocarbon chains of the fatty acids. If there are no double bonds between the carbon atoms composing the chain, then as many hydrogen atoms as possible are bonded to the carbon skeleton. Such a structure is described as being saturated with hydrogen, so the resulting fatty acid is called a saturated fatty acid (see FIGURE 5.11a). An unsaturated fatty acid has one or more double bonds, formed by the removal of hydrogen atoms from the carbon skeleton. The fatty acid will have a kink in its tail wherever a double bond occurs (FIGURE 5.11b).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 5-11. Examples of saturated and unsaturated fats and fatty acids.

A fat made from saturated fatty acids is called a saturated fat. Most animal fats are saturated: The "tails" of their fatty acids lack double bonds. Saturated animal fats--such as lard and butter--are solid at room temperature. In contrast, the fats of plants and fishes are generally unsaturated, meaning that they are built of one or more types of unsaturated fatty acids. Usually liquid at room temperature, plant and fish fats are referred to as oils--for instance, corn oil and cod liver oil. The kinks where the double bonds are located prevent the molecules from packing together closely enough to solidify at room temperature. The phrase "hydrogenated vegetable oils" on food labels means that unsaturated fats have been synthetically converted to saturated fats by adding hydrogen. Peanut butter, margarine, and many other products are hydrogenated to prevent lipids from separating out in liquid (oil) form.

A diet rich in saturated fats is one of several factors that may contribute to the cardiovascular disease known as atherosclerosis. In this condition, deposits called plaques develop on the internal lining of blood vessels, impeding blood flow and reducing the resilience of the vessels.

Fat has come to have such a negative connotation in our culture that you might wonder whether fats serve any useful purpose. The major function of fats is energy storage. The hydrocarbon chains of fats are similar to gasoline molecules and are just as rich in energy. A gram of fat stores more than twice as much energy as a gram of a polysaccharide, such as starch. Because plants are relatively immobile, they can function with bulky energy storage in the form of starch. (Vegetable oils are generally obtained from seeds, where more compact storage is an asset to the plant.) Animals, on the other hand, must carry their energy stores with them, so there is an advantage to having a more compact reservoir of fuel--fat. Humans and other mammals stock their long-term food reserves in adipose cells (see FIGURE 4.5), which swell and shrink as fat is deposited and withdrawn from storage. In addition to storing energy, adipose tissue also cushions such vital organs as the kidneys, and a layer of fat beneath the skin insulates the body. This subcutaneous layer is especially thick in whales, seals, and most other marine mammals.




