
 The endodermis functions as a selective sentry between the root cortex and vascular tissue

Water and minerals that pass from the soil into the root cortex cannot be transported to the rest of the plant until they enter the xylem of the stele. The endodermis, the innermost layer of cells in the root cortex, surrounds the stele and functions as a last checkpoint for the selective passage of minerals from the cortex into the vascular tissue (see FIGURE 36.7). Minerals already in the symplast when they reach the endodermis continue through the plasmodesmata of the endodermal cells and pass into the stele. These minerals were already screened by the selective membrane they had to cross to enter the symplast in the epidermis or cortex. Those minerals that reach the endodermis via the apoplast encounter a dead end that blocks their passage into the stele: In the wall of each endodermal cell is the Casparian strip, a belt made of suberin, a waxy material that is impervious to water and dissolved minerals. Thus, water and minerals cannot cross the endodermis and enter vascular tissue via the apoplast. The only way past this barrier is for the water and minerals to cross the plasma membrane of an endodermal cell and enter the stele via the symplast. The endodermis, with its Casparian strip, ensures that no minerals can reach the vascular tissue of the root without crossing a selectively permeable plasma membrane. If minerals do not enter cells in the cortex, they must enter endodermal cells or be excluded from the vascular tissue. The structure of the endodermis and its strategic location in the root fit its function as sentry of the cortex-stele border, a function that contributes to the ability of roots to preferentially transport certain minerals from the soil into the xylem.

The last segment in the soil  xylem pathway is the passage of water and minerals into the tracheids and vessel elements of the xylem. These water-conducting cells lack protoplasts, and thus the lumen of these cells and the cell walls are part of the apoplast. Endodermal cells as well as parenchyma cells within the stele discharge minerals into their walls. Both diffusion and active transport are probably involved in this transfer of solutes from symplast to apoplast, and the water and minerals are now free to enter the tracheids and xylem vessels. The water and mineral nutrients we have tracked from the soil to root xylem can now be transported upward as xylem sap to the shoot system.




