
 An evolutionary trend does not mean that evolution is goal oriented

The fossil record seems to reveal trends in the evolution of many species and lineages. For instance, some lineages exhibit a trend toward larger or smaller body size. A case in point is the evolution of the modern horse, which is a descendant of a much smaller ancestor named Hyracotherium. About the size of a large dog, Hyracotherium browsed in woodlands some 40 million years ago. In comparison to this ancestor, modern horses (genus Equus) are larger, the number of toes has been reduced from four on each foot to one, and the teeth have become modified for grazing on grasses rather than browsing on shrubs and trees. Do these macroevolutionary changes represent trends, and if so, how do we account for such trends?

Extracting a single evolutionary progression from a fossil record that is likely to be incomplete is misleading; it is like describing a bush as growing toward a single point by tracing the system of branches that leads from the base of the bush to one particular twig. For instance, by selecting certain species from the available fossils, it is possible to arrange a succession of animals intermediate between Hyracotherium and modern horses that shows trends toward increased size, reduced number of toes, and modification of teeth for grazing (yellow line in FIGURE 24.24). We might interpret this series of fossils as an unbranched lineage leading directly from Hyracotherium to modern horses through a continuum of intermediate stages. If we include all fossil horses known today, however, the illusion of coherent, progressive evolution leading directly to modern horses vanishes. The genus Equus is the only surviving twig of an evolutionary tree that is so branched that it is more like a bush. Equus descended through a series of speciation episodes that included several adaptive radiations, not all of which led to large, one-toed, grazing horses. For instance, notice in FIGURE 24.24 that only those lineages derived from Parahippus include grazers; other lineages derived from Miohippus produced browsers.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 24-24. The branched evolution of horses. If we use a yellow highlighter to trace the sequence of fossil horses that are intermediate in form between the modern horse and its Eocene ancestor Hyracotherium, we create the illusion of a progressive trend toward larger size, reduced number of toes, and teeth modified for grazing. In fact, the modern horse is the only surviving twig of an evolutionary bush with many divergent trends.

Branching evolution can produce a macroevolutionary trend even if some new species counter the trend. In a view of macroevolution enunciated by Steven Stanley, of Johns Hopkins University, species are analogous to individuals: Speciation is their birth, extinction is their death, and new species are their offspring. According to this model, an evolutionary trend is produced by species selection, which is analogous to the production of a trend within a population by natural selection. The species that endure the longest and generate the greatest number of new species determine the direction of major evolutionary trends. This concept suggests that differential speciation plays a role in macroevolution similar to the role of differential reproduction in microevolution.

To the extent that speciation rates and species longevity reflect success, the analogy to natural selection is even stronger. But qualities unrelated to the overall success of organisms in specific environments may be equally important in species selection. For example, the ability of a species to disperse to new locations may contribute to its giving rise to a large number of "daughter species." The species selection model has many critics who argue that evolutionary trends more commonly result from the gradual modification of populations in response to environmental change. The value of such debates is that they stimulate research, and many paleontologists and other evolutionary biologists are now focusing on the question of what produces evolutionary trends.

Whatever its cause, the appearance of an evolutionary trend does not0 imply that there is some intrinsic drive toward a preordained state of being. Evolution is a response to interactions between organisms and their current environments. If conditions change, an evolutionary trend may cease or even reverse itself.

In the next chapter, we will continue our study of macroevolution with a more detailed look at the fossil record and some of the effects of significant environmental change on species and speciation.




