
 Regulating and conforming are the two extremes in how animals cope with environmental fluctuations

An animal is said to be a regulator for a particular environmental variable if it uses mechanisms of homeostasis to moderate internal change in the face of external fluctuation. For example, endothermic animals such as mammals and birds are thermoregulators, meaning they keep body temperature within narrow limits in spite of changes in environmental temperature. Let's consider another example. Pacific salmon spend part of their lives in salt water and part in fresh water. Throughout this change in "osmotic environment," a salmon uses mechanisms of osmoregulation to maintain a constant concentration of solutes in its blood and interstitial fluid.

In contrast to such regulators, many other animals, especially those that live in relatively stable environments, are conformers in their relationship to certain environmental changes. Such conformers allow some conditions within their bodies to vary with certain external changes (FIGURE 44.1a). Many marine invertebrates, such as spider crabs of the genus Libinia, live in environments where the salinity is relatively stable. These organisms do not osmoregulate, and if placed in water of varying salinity, they will lose or gain water to conform to the external environment even when this internal adjustment is extreme enough to cause death (FIGURE 44.1b).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 44-1. Regulators and conformers.

Conforming and regulating represent extremes on a continuum, and no organisms are perfect regulators or conformers. For example, the salmon previously described can osmoregulate, but they conform to external temperatures.

Even for a particular environmental variable, a species may conform in one situation and regulate in another. Regulation requires the expenditure of energy, and in some environments the cost of regulation may outweigh the benefits of homeostasis. For example, temperature regulation would require the forest-dwelling lizard Anolis cristatellus to travel long distances (and risk capture by a predator) to find an exposed sunny perch. (Reptiles are ectotherms, but can regulate body temperature by moving to a location of favorable temperature.) The lizard is therefore likely to survive longer and produce more offspring by allowing its body temperature to conform to that of the forest environment. However, this same species uses a behavioral adaptation to thermoregulate in open habitats; the lizard seeks patches of sun where it can bask.




