
 Classical ethology presaged an evolutionary approach to behavioral biology

Modern behavioral biology has its roots in a research field known as ethology, which originated in the 1930s with naturalists who tried to understand how a variety of animals behave in their natural habitats (FIGURE 51.2). Foremost among these naturalists were Karl von Frisch, Konrad Lorenz, and Niko Tinbergen, who shared a Nobel Prize in 1973 for their discoveries. How animals can carry out many behaviors without ever having seen them performed was one of the major subjects of early ethological research. Ethologists focused on proximate mechanisms, but with an eye toward the genetic links to behavior and the adaptive nature of behavior, an orientation that helped connect behavioral biology with evolution and ecology.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 51-2. Niko Tinbergen's experiments on the digger wasp's nest-locating behavior.

Early ethologists developed the concept of a fixed action pattern (FAP), a sequence of behavioral acts that is essentially unchangeable and usually carried to completion once initiated. A FAP is triggered by an external sensory stimulus known as a sign stimulus. In many cases, the sign stimulus is some feature of another species. For example, some moths instantly fold their wings and drop to the ground in response to the ultrasonic signals sent out by predatory bats (see the introduction to Chapter 49). The ultrasonic signals are the cue that triggers avoidance behavior in the moths.

A classic case of sign stimuli and FAPs is seen in the male three-spined stickleback fish, which attacks other males that invade his territory. The stimulus for the attack behavior is the red belly of the intruder. The stickleback will not attack an invading fish lacking a red underside, but will readily attack nonfishlike models as long as some red is present (FIGURE 51.3). Tinbergen, who first reported these findings, was inspired to look into the matter by his casual observation that his fish responded aggressively when a red truck passed their tank. As it turns out, red coloration of body parts tends to trigger either aggressive or sexual behavior in many species that have color vision.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 51-3. Classic demonstration of innate behavior. Aggression in a male three-spined stickleback fish is triggered by a simple visual cue. The realistic model at the top without a red underside produces no response. All the others produce strong responses because they have the required red underside.

Classic experiments on FAPs and sign stimuli have shown that many animals tend to use a relatively limited subset of the sensory information available to them and to behave stereotypically in many situations. In contrast, humans often tend to respond to an entire situation, and we generally base our actions on more diverse information. If a stickleback processed information like a human, it would realize that the models in FIGURE 51.3 are not real fish, despite their red bellies. Actually, relatively simple, stereotypical behaviors seem to occur in all animals, including humans. Human infants grasp strongly with their hands in response to a tactile stimulus. An infant's smile could also be considered a FAP; it is readily induced by simple stimuli, such as a sound or a figure consisting of two dark spots on a white circle, a kind of rudimentary representation of a face.

A sign stimulus is a key feature in an animal's environment, leading the animal to respond quickly and appropriately. However, because the animal responds to the sign rather than to the whole environmental context, the animal can often be tricked into inappropriate behavior, as in the stickleback's response to the models in FIGURE 51.3. In some cases, such misdirected responses can be detrimental. For example, mayflies swarm and mate above water, and females then deposit their eggs on the water surface. The breeding mayflies detect a water surface by the polarization pattern of the light reflected from it. Unfortunately, roads can produce a similar polarization pattern in reflected light, and mayflies now often lay their eggs on roads, where the eggs perish (FIGURE 51.4). Many mayfly species are endangered, and their behavioral mechanism for detecting water may drive them to extinction in environments where roads are becoming more abundant than standing water. Given the potential of sign stimuli to mislead animals into maladaptive behavior, we might ask why animals use them at all. Some ethologists have suggested that FAPs triggered by simple cues prevent an animal from wasting time processing or integrating a wide variety of inputs.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 51-4. Mayflies laying eggs on human-made surfaces. Mayflies normally lay their eggs on water, but the pattern of polarized light that they use to find water is also produced by reflections from black plastic sheets and roads. (a) Female mayfly ovipositing (egg-laying) on black plastic sheet used in agriculture (b) Male mayfly attracted to a dry asphalt road

Although some simple behavior patterns can be understood in terms of sign stimuli and fixed action patterns, the concept is too simplistic to account for much of animal behavior. Though historically important in the development of behavioral biology, sign stimuli and fixed action patterns are not major focuses of behavioral research today.




