
 By the law of independent assortment, each pair of alleles segregates into gametes independently

Gregor Mendel derived the law of segregation by performing breeding experiments in which he followed only a single character, such as flower color. The F1 hybrids produced in such crosses are called monohybrids. What would happen if he followed two characters at the same time? For instance, two of the seven characters Mendel studied were seed color and seed shape. Seeds may be either yellow or green. They also may be either round (smooth) or wrinkled. From single-character crosses, Mendel knew that the allele for yellow seeds is dominant (Y) and that the allele for green seeds is recessive (y). For the seed-shape character, the allele for round is dominant (R), and the allele for wrinkled is recessive (r). Imagine crossing two true-breeding pea varieties differing in both of these characters--a parental cross between a plant with yellow-round seeds (YYRR) and a plant with green-wrinkled seeds (yyrr). The F1 plants will be dihybrids, heterozygous for both characters (YyRr). But are these two characters, seed color and seed shape, transmitted from parents to offspring as a package? Put another way, will the Y and R alleles always stay together, generation after generation? Or are seed color and seed shape inherited independently of each other? FIGURE 14.7 illustrates how a dihybrid cross, a cross between F1 dihybrids, can determine which of these two hypotheses is correct.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 14-7. Testing two hypotheses for segregation in a dihybrid cross. A cross between true-breeding parent plants that differ in two characters produces F1 plants that are dihybrids: They are heterozygous for both characters. The F2 phenotypes show that the characters assort (segregate) independently. In this example, the two characters are seed color and seed shape. Yellow color (Y) and round shape (R) are dominant.

The F1 plants, of genotype YyRr, exhibit both dominant phenotypes, yellow seeds with round shapes, no matter which hypothesis is correct. The key step in the experiment is to see what happens when F1 plants self-pollinate to produce F2 offspring. If the hybrids must transmit their alleles in the same combinations in which they were inherited from the P generation, then there will only be two classes of gametes: YR and yr. This hypothesis predicts that the phenotypic ratio of the F2 generation will be 3:1, just as in a cross between monohybrids (see FIGURE 14.7a).

The alternative hypothesis is that the two pairs of alleles segregate independently of each other. In other words, genes are packaged into gametes in all possible allelic combinations, as long as each gamete has one allele for each gene. In our example, four classes of gametes would be produced in equal quantities: YR, Yr, yR, and yr. If sperm of four classes are mixed with ova of four classes, there will be 16 (4 &#160;X&#160; 4) equally probable ways in which the alleles can combine in the F2 generation, as shown in FIGURE 14.7b. These combinations make up four phenotypic categories with a ratio of 9:3:3:1 (nine yellow-round to three green-round to three yellow-wrinkled to one green-wrinkled). When Mendel did the experiment and "scored" (classified) the F2 offspring, he obtained a ratio of 315:108:101:32, which is approximately 9:3:3:1.

The experimental results supported the hypothesis that each character is independently inherited--that in the dihybrids (YyRr), the two alleles for seed color segregate independently of the two alleles for seed shape. Mendel tried his seven pea characters in various dihybrid combinations and always observed a 9:3:3:1 phenotypic ratio in the F2 generation. Notice in FIGURE 14.7b, however, that, if you consider the two characters separately, there is a 3:1 phenotypic ratio for each: three yellow to one green; three round to one wrinkled. As far as a single character is concerned, the alleles segregate as if this were a monohybrid cross. The independent segregation of each pair of alleles during gamete formation is now called Mendel's law of independent assortment.




