
 Transfer of substances between the blood and the interstitial fluid occurs across the thin walls of capillaries

Blood Flow Through Capillary Beds

At any given time, only about 5-10%  of the body's capillaries have blood flowing through them. However, each tissue has many capillaries, so every part of the body is supplied with blood at all times. Capillaries in the brain, heart, kidneys, and liver are usually filled to capacity, but in many other sites, the blood supply varies over time as blood is diverted from one destination to another. After a meal, for instance, blood supply to the digestive tract increases. During strenuous exercise, blood is diverted from the digestive tract and supplied more generously to skeletal muscles and skin. This is one reason heavy exercise immediately after eating a big meal may cause indigestion.

Two mechanisms, both dependent on smooth muscles controlled by nerve signals and hormones, regulate the distribution of blood in capillary beds. In one mechanism, contraction of the smooth muscle layer in the wall of an arteriole constricts the vessel, decreasing blood flow through it to a capillary bed. When the muscle layer relaxes, the arteriole dilates, allowing blood to enter the capillaries. In the other mechanism, rings of smooth muscle, called precapillary sphincters because they are located at the entrance to capillary beds, control the flow of blood between arterioles and venules (FIGURE 42.12).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-12. Blood flow in capillary beds. Precapillary sphincters regulate the passage of blood into capillary beds. Some blood flows directly from arterioles to venules through capillaries called thoroughfare channels, which are always open.

Capillary Exchange

The all-important exchange of substances between the blood and the interstitial fluid that bathes the cells takes place across the thin endothelial walls of the capillaries. Some substances may be carried across an endothelial cell in vesicles that form by endocytosis on one side of the cell (see FIGURE 8.19) and then release their contents by exocytosis on the opposite side; others simply diffuse between the blood and the interstitial fluid. Small molecules, such as oxygen and carbon dioxide, diffuse down concentration gradients across the endothelial cells. Diffusion can also occur through the clefts between adjoining cells. However, transport through these clefts occurs mainly by bulk flow due to fluid pressure. Blood pressure within the capillary pushes fluid (water and small solutes such as sugars, salts, oxygen, and urea) through the capillary clefts. This causes a net loss of fluid from the upstream end of the capillary (near an arteriole). Blood cells suspended in blood and most proteins dissolved in the blood are too large to pass readily through the endothelium and remain in the capillaries, causing an increase in blood osmolarity (solute concentration) as blood loses fluid during its passage through a capillary. The resulting osmotic gradient pulls water into the capillary by osmosis near the downstream (venule) end (FIGURE 42.13). About 85%  of the fluid that leaves the blood at the arterial end of a capillary bed reenters from the interstitial fluid at the venous end, and the remaining 15%  is eventually returned to the blood by the vessels of the lymphatic system.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-13. The movement of fluid between capillaries and the interstitial fluid. Fluid flows out of a capillary at the upstream end near an arteriole and reenters a capillary down-stream near a venule. The direction of fluid movement across the capillary wall at any point depends on the difference between two opposing forces: blood pressure and osmotic pressure.




