
 Cardiovascular diseases are the leading cause of death in the United States and most other developed nations

More than half the deaths in the United States are caused by cardiovascular diseases, diseases of the heart and blood vessels. The final blow is usually a heart attack or a stroke. A heart attack is the death of cardiac muscle tissue resulting from prolonged blockage of one or more coronary arteries, the vessels that supply oxygen-rich blood to the heart (the constantly beating heart muscle cannot survive long without oxygen). A stroke is the death of nervous tissue in the brain, usually resulting from rupture or blockage of arteries in the head. Heart attacks and strokes frequently result from a thrombus that clogs an artery. A thrombus may form in a coronary artery or an artery in the brain, or it may develop elsewhere in the circulatory system and reach the heart or brain via the bloodstream. Such a transported clot, called an embolus, is swept along until it becomes lodged in an artery too small for the clot to pass. This blocks blood flow, and cardiac or brain tissue downstream from the obstruction may die from oxygen deprivation. If damage in the heart interrupts the conduction of electrical impulses through cardiac muscle, heart rate may change drastically or the heart may stop beating altogether. Still, the victim may survive if heartbeat is restored by cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) or some other emergency procedure within a few minutes of the attack. The effects of a stroke and the individual's chance of survival depend on the extent and location of the damaged brain tissue.

The suddenness of a heart attack or stroke belies the fact that the arteries of most victims had become gradually impaired by a chronic cardiovascular disease known as atherosclerosis. During the course of this disease, growths called plaques develop on the inner walls of the arteries, narrowing their bore (FIGURE 42.17). A plaque forms at a site where the smooth muscle layer of an artery thickens abnormally and becomes infiltrated with fibrous connective tissue and lipids such as cholesterol. In some cases, plaques also become hardened by calcium deposits, resulting in a form of atherosclerosis called arteriosclerosis, commonly known as hardening of the arteries. An embolus is more likely to become trapped in a vessel that has been narrowed by plaques. Furthermore, plaques are common sites of thrombus formation. Healthy arteries have smooth linings, but the rougher lining of an artery damaged by atherosclerosis seems to encourage the adhesion of platelets, which triggers the clotting process.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-17. Atherosclerosis. These light micrographs contrast a cross section of (a) a normal artery with (b) an artery partially closed by an atherosclerotic plaque. Plaques consist mostly of fibrous connective tissue and smooth muscle cells infiltrated with lipids.

As atherosclerosis progresses, arteries become more and more clogged and the threat of heart attack or stroke becomes much greater. Sometimes there are warnings. For example, if a coronary artery is partially blocked by atherosclerosis, a person may feel occasional chest pains, a condition known as angina pectoris. The pain is a signal that part of the heart is not receiving a sufficient supply of oxygen, and it is most likely to occur when the heart is laboring hard because of physical or emotional stress. Unfortunately, many people with atherosclerosis are completely unaware of their disease until catastrophe strikes.

Hypertension (high blood pressure) promotes atherosclerosis and increases the risk of heart attack and stroke. Atherosclerosis tends to increase blood pressure by narrowing the bore of the vessels and reducing their elasticity. According to one hypothesis, high blood pressure causes chronic damage to the endothelium that lines arteries, promoting plaque formation. Fortunately, hypertension is simple to diagnose and can usually be controlled by diet, exercise, medication, or a combination of these. A diastolic pressure above 90 may be cause for concern, and living with extreme hypertension--say, 200/120--is courting disaster.

To some extent, the tendency to develop hypertension and atherosclerosis is inherited. Nongenetic factors that have been correlated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease include smoking, lack of exercise, a diet rich in animal fat, and an abnormally high concentration of cholesterol in the blood. Cholesterol travels in the blood plasma mainly in the form of particles made up of thousands of cholesterol molecules and other lipids bound to a protein. One form of these particles called low-density lipoproteins (LDLs), the so-called "bad cholesterol," is associated with the depositing of cholesterol in arterial plaques. Another form, called high-density lipoproteins (HDLs), the so-called "good cholesterol," may reduce cholesterol deposition. Exercise tends to increase HDL concentration, while smoking has the opposite effect on the LDL-to-HDL ratio.




