
 They're (almost) everywhere! An overview of prokaryotic life

Today, prokaryotes still dominate the biosphere. Their collective biological mass (biomass) outweighs all eukaryotes combined by at least tenfold. More prokaryotes inhabit a handful of fertile soil or the mouth or skin of a human than the total number of people who have ever lived. In the colorized scanning electron micrograph on this page, the tiny orange rods are bacteria on the point of a pin. (You can see from this micrograph why a pin prick can cause an infection, and why it's important to flame the tip of a needle to kill bacteria before using the needle to remove a splinter.)

Prokaryotes are found wherever there is life. They also thrive in habitats too cold, too hot, too salty, too acidic, or too alkaline for any eukaryote (FIGURE 27.1). In 1999, biologists even discovered prokaryotes growing on the walls of a gold mine 2 miles below Earth's surface.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 27-1. "Heat-loving" prokaryotes. The vivid reds, oranges, and yellows that paint these rocks are colonies of prokaryotes that thrive in the extremely hot water (up to 104&#176;C) that flows from this Nevada geyser. Ranchers accidentally tapped the geyser when they were drilling for water in 1916.

Though individual prokaryotes are relatively small organisms, they are giants in their collective impact on Earth and its life. We hear most about a minority of species that cause serious illness. During the 14th century, Black Death--bubonic plague, a bacterial disease--spread across Europe, killing an estimated 25%  of the human population. Tuberculosis, cholera, many sexually transmissible diseases, and certain types of food poisoning are other human diseases caused by bacteria.

However, prokaryotic life is no rogues' gallery. Far more common than harmful bacteria are those that are benign or beneficial. Bacteria in our intestines provide us with important vitamins, and others living in our mouth prevent harmful fungi from growing there. Prokaryotes also cycle carbon and other vital chemical elements back and forth between organic matter and the soil and atmosphere. For example, there are prokaryotes that decompose dead organisms. Found in soil and at the bottom of lakes, rivers, and oceans, these decomposers return chemical elements to the environment in the form of inorganic compounds that can be used by plants, which in turn feed animals. If prokaryotic decomposers were to disappear, the chemical cycles that sustain life would break down. All forms of eukaryotic life would also be doomed. In contrast, prokaryotic life would undoubtedly persist in the absence of eukaryotes, as it once did for 1.5 billion years.

Prokaryotes often live in close associations with other prokaryotes and with eukaryotes in what are called symbiotic relationships. In the most historically important case of such symbiosis, mitochondria and chloroplasts evolved from prokaryotes that became residents within larger host cells. Thus, animals, plants, fungi, and protists evolved from symbiotic associations of ancestral cells. (We will examine this theory of eukaryotic origins further in Chapter 28.)

Modern prokaryotes are diverse in structure and metabolism. About 5,000 species of prokaryotes are known, and estimates of actual prokaryotic diversity range from about 400,000 to 4 million species. As Harvard University biologist E.O. Wilson puts it, a true sense of biodiversity requires a "downward adjustment of scale."




