
 Land plants evolved from charophycean algae over 500 million years ago





Let's review the evidence for a phylogenetic connection between land plants and green algae, especially the charophyceans:

Homologous chloroplasts. The algal plastids most like plant chloroplasts are those of green algae and algal groups such as euglenoids, which acquired green algae as secondary endosymbionts (see FIGURE 28.25). The similarities include chlorophyll b and beta-carotene as accessory pigments and thylakoids stacked as grana. Comparisons of chloroplast DNA place the charophyceans as the green algae most closely related to land plants.

Homologous cellulose walls. Though cellulose walls are found in a diversity of algae, the walls of charophyceans are the most plantlike, with cellulose making up 20-26%  of the wall material in both plants and charophyceans. The cellulose-manufacturing rosettes found only in the plasma membranes of charophyceans and land plants are further evidence of cell wall homology.

Homologous Peroxisomes. Charophyceans are the only algae with their anti-photorespiration enzymes packaged in peroxisomes, as they are in plants.

Phragmoplasts. These assemblies occur during cell division only in plants and charophyceans.

Homologous sperm. Many plants have flagellated sperm, which match charophycean sperm closely in ultrastructure.

Molecular systematics. In addition to comparing the chloroplast DNA of charophyceans and plants, molecular systematists have also compared key nuclear genes, such as those for ribosomal RNA and cytoskeletal proteins. The results support all the other evidence connecting charophyceans and plants to a common ancestor and point especially to the most complex charophyceans, such as Chara and Coleochaete (see FIGURE 29.2) as the algae most closely related to plants. However, it is important to understand that modern Chara and Coleochaete are not the ancestors of plants.

Fossils place plants on land over 500 million years ago. The oldest known traces of land plants are encased in mid-Cambrian rocks about 550 million years old. They are microscopic fossils of what paleobotanists interpret to be plant spores. Fossilized plant spores are plentiful in mid-Ordovician (460-million-year-old) deposits from around the world, suggesting that by then plants were abundant and widespread. Some of these fossilized spores occur in aggregates of four, which is the way some modern bryophytes release their spores. The tough walls of sporopollenin explain why spores are the plant structures most likely to leave a fossil record. However, fossilized spores are sometimes associated with scraps of tissue that may represent the remains of the sporophytes that produced the spores (FIGURE 29.12).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 29-12. Fossilized spores and sporophyte tissue.




