
 DNA technology raises important safety and ethical questions

As soon as scientists realized the power of DNA technology, they began to worry about potential dangers. Early concerns focused on the possibility that recombinant DNA technology might create hazardous new pathogens. What might happen, for instance, if cancer cell genes were transferred into bacteria or viruses? Scientists developed a set of guidelines that in the United States and some other countries have become formal government regulations.

One type of safety measure is a set of strict laboratory procedures designed to protect researchers from infection by engineered microbes and to prevent the microbes from accidentally leaving the laboratory. In addition, strains of micro-organisms to be used in recombinant DNA experiments are genetically crippled to ensure that they cannot survive outside the laboratory. Finally, certain obviously dangerous experiments have been banned. Today, most public concern about possible hazards centers not on recombinant microbes but on genetically modified (GM) organisms used in agriculture. In common parlance, a "GM organism" is one that has acquired one or more genes by artificial means; the gene need not be from another species.

Animals that have been genetically modified by artificial means are still not part of our food supply, but GM crop plants are. In 1999, controversy about the safety of these foods exploded in the United Kingdom--where one of the more extreme headlines warned of "the mad forces of genetic darkness"--and soon spread through Europe. In response to these concerns, the European Union suspended the introduction of new GM crops pending new legislation and started considering the possibility of banning the import of all GM foodstuffs. In the United States and other countries where the GM revolution had been proceeding more quietly, the labeling of GM foods as such is now being debated.

Early in 2000, negotiators from 130 countries (including the United States) agreed on a Biosafety Protocol that requires exporters to identify GM organisms present in bulk food shipments and allows importing countries to decide whether they pose environmental or health risks. This agreement has been hailed as a breakthrough by environmentalists.

Advocates of a cautious approach fear that crops carrying genes from other species might somehow be hazardous to human health or cause ecological harm to the environment. A major concern is that transgenic plants might pass their new genes to close relatives in nearby wild areas. We know that lawn and crop grasses, for example, commonly exchange genes with wild relatives via pollen transfer. If domestic plants carrying genes for resistance to herbicides, diseases, or insect pests pollinated wild ones, the offspring might become "super-weeds" very difficult to control. However, researchers may be able to prevent the escape of such plant genes by engineering plants so that they cannot hybridize. In April 2000, the U.S. National Academy of Sciences released a study finding no scientific evidence that crops genetically modified to resist pests pose any special health or environmental risks, but the authors of the study also recommended more stringent regulations than now exist. To date, there is little good data on either side; more study is needed.

Today, governments and regulatory agencies throughout the world are grappling with how to facilitate the use of biotechnology in argiculture, industry, and medicine while ensuring that new products and procedures are safe. In the United States, all projects are evaluated for potential risks by various regulatory agencies, including the Food and Drug Administration, the Environmental Protection Agency, the National Institutes of Health, and the Department of Agriculture. These agencies are under increasing pressure from some consumer groups. Meanwhile, these same agencies must consider some of the ethical questions revised by the new biotechnology.

As with all new technologies, developments in DNA technology have ethical overtones. Obtaining a complete map of the human genome, for example, opens the door to significant ethical questions. Who should have the right to examine someone else's genes? How should that information be used? Should a person's genome be a factor in suitability for a job or eligibility for insurance? Ethical considerations, as well as concerns about potential environmental and health hazards, will likely slow the application of the products of the new biotechnology. There is always a danger that too much regulation will stifle basic research and its potential benefits. However, the power of DNA technology and genetic engineering--our ability to profoundly and rapidly alter species that have been evolving for millennia--demands that we proceed with humility and caution.




