
 Seeds became an important means of dispersing offspring

In bryophytes and seedless vascular plants such as ferns, spores produced by sporophytes are the resistant stage in the life cycle--that is, the stage that can withstand harsh environments. (A spore, recall from Chapter 29, is a resistant cell that can develop into a new organism.) For example, the spores of a moss might be able to survive even if the local environment becomes too cold, too hot, or too dry for the moss plants themselves to live. And because of their tiny size, the spores might also be dispersed in a dormant state to a new area, where they will germinate to give rise to new moss gametophytes if and when the environment is favorable enough for them to break dormancy. Spores were the main way that plants spread over the Earth for the first 200 million years of plant life on land.

The seed represents a different solution to resisting harsh environments and dispersing offspring. In contrast to a spore, which is single-celled, a seed is a resistant structure that is multicellular and much more complex. A seed consists of a sporophyte embryo packaged along with a food supply within a protective coat. There are evolutionary and developmental relationships between spores and seeds. Recall from the previous section that the reduced gametophytes of seed plants develop within tissues of the parental sporophyte. This occurs because the parent sporophyte does not release its spores, but instead retains them within its sporangia. Not only are the spores retained within the sporangia instead of being released, but the gametophyte develops within the confines of the spore from which it is derived (see FIGURE 30.1c).

All seed plants are heterosporous, meaning they have two different types of sporangia that produce two types of spores: Megasporangia produce megaspores, which give rise to female (egg-containing) gametophytes; microsporangia produce microspores, which give rise to male (sperm-containing) gametophytes. And recall from Chapter 29 that some seedless vascular plants, including certain ferns, are also hetero sporous. The gametophytes of those plants develop within the spore walls, as they do in seed plants. What distinguishes seed plants is that the megaspores, and hence the female gametophytes, are retained on the parent sporophyte.

In seed plants, layers of sporophyte tissues called integuments envelop the megasporangium. Thus a megaspore formed within the megasporangium is very well protected. The whole structure--integuments, megasporangium, and megaspore--is called an ovule (FIGURE 30.2a). A female gametophyte develops inside a megaspore and produces one or more egg cells. And if an egg cell is fertilized by a sperm (FIGURE 30.2b), the zygote develops into a sporophyte embryo. The whole ovule develops into a seed (FIGURE 30.2c).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 30-2. From ovule to seed.

A seed's protective seed coat is derived from the integuments of the ovule. Once released from the parent plant, a seed may remain dormant for days, months, or even years. Under favorable conditions, the seed can then germinate, its sporophyte embryo emerging through the seed coat as a seedling. Some seeds drop close to their parents; others are carried far by wind or animals (FIGURE 30.3).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 30-3. Winged seed of a White Pine (Pinus strobus).




