
 Linked genes tend to be inherited together because they are located on the same chromosome

The number of genes in a cell is far greater than the number of chromosomes; in fact, each chromosome has hundreds or thousands of genes. Genes located on the same chromosome tend to be inherited together in genetic crosses because the chromosome is passed along as a unit. Such genes are said to be linked genes. (Note that these genes are linked to each other. Here the use of the word linked is different from its use in the term sex-linked gene, where the gene is on a sex chromosome.) When geneticists follow linked genes in breeding experiments, the results deviate from those expected according to the Mendelian principle of independent assortment.

Let's examine another of Morgan's Drosophila experiments to see how linkage between genes affects the inheritance of two different characters (FIGURE 15.4). In this case, the characters are body color and wing size. Wild-type flies have gray bodies and normal wings. Morgan had flies with mutant versions of these characters: black body and vestigial wings (much smaller than normal wings). The alleles for these traits are represented by the following symbols: b+ = gray, b = black; vg+ = normal wings, vg = vestigial wings.* The mutant alleles are recessive to the wild-type alleles, and neither gene is sex-linked.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 15-4. Evidence for linked genes in Drosophila. The tinted area highlights a testcross between a dihybrid female fly, heterozygous for both body color and wing size, and a double-recessive male, homozygous for both recessive alleles. (The male has a "double mutant" phenotype.) When Morgan "scored" (classified according to phenotype) 2,300 offspring from such matings, he observed a much higher proportion of parental phenotypes than would be expected if the two genes assorted independently. Morgan concluded that these genes are usually transmitted together because they are located on the same chromosome. Crossing over accounts for the recombinant phenotypes (combinations of traits different from the combination in either parent).

Morgan mated true-breeding wild-type flies (b+b+vg+vg1+) with black, vestigial-winged ones (b b vg vg) to produce F1 dihybrids (b+bvg+vg), which are wild type in appearance. He then crossed female dihybrids with males of the "double-mutant" phenotype (b b vg vg). Notice that this cross corresponds to a Mendelian testcross. According to Mendel's law of independent assortment, Morgan's Drosophila testcross should produce four phenotypic classes of offspring that are about equal in number: 1 gray-normal : 1 black-vestigial : 1 gray-vestigial : 1 black-normal. (To see why, rework FIGURE 14.6 with a dihybrid.) But the actual results were different: There were disproportionately large numbers of wild-type (gray-normal) and double-mutant (black-vestigial) flies among the offspring. These two phenotypes correspond to those of the P generation parents, as well as to those of the parents in the testcross. Morgan reasoned that body color and wing shape are usually inherited together in specific combinations because the genes for these characters are on the same chromosome:

Although the other two phenotypes (gray-vestigial and black-normal) numbered fewer than expected based on independent assortment, these phenotypes were represented among the offspring of Morgan's cross. These new phenotypic variations resulted from crossing over, discussed next.




