
 A lateral line system and inner ear detect pressure waves in most fishes and aquatic amphibians

Like other vertebrates, fishes and aquatic amphibians also have inner ears located near the brain. There is no cochlea, but there are a saccule, a utricle, and semicircular canals, structures homologous to the equilibrium sensors of our own ears. Within these chambers in the inner ear of a fish, sensory hairs are stimulated by the movement of otoliths. Unlike the mammalian hearing apparatus, the ear of a fish has no eardrum and does not open to the outside of the body. Vibrations of the water caused by sound waves are conducted through the skeleton of the head to the inner ears, setting the otoliths in motion and stimulating the hair cells. The air-filled swim bladder (see Chapter 34) also vibrates in response to sound and may contribute to the transfer of sound to the inner ear. Some fishes, including catfishes and minnows, have a series of bones called the Weberian apparatus, which conducts vibrations from the swim bladder to the inner ear.

Most fishes and aquatic amphibians also have a lateral line system along both sides of the body (FIGURE 49.20). The system contains mechanoreceptors that detect low-frequency waves by a mechanism similar to the function of the inner ear. Water from the animal's surroundings enters the lateral line system through numerous pores and flows along a tube past the mechanoreceptors. The receptor units, called neuromasts, resemble the ampullae in our semicircular canals. Each neuromast has a cluster of hair cells, with the sensory hairs embedded in a gelatinous cap, the cupula. As the pressure of moving water bends a cupula, the hair cells transduce the energy into receptor potentials and then into action potentials that are transmitted along a nerve to the brain. This information helps the fish perceive its movement through water or the direction and velocity of water currents flowing over its body. The lateral line system also detects water movements or vibrations generated by other moving objects, including prey and predators.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 49-20. The lateral line system in a fish. Water flowing through the system bends hair cells. The hair cells transduce the energy into receptor potentials, triggering action potentials, which are conveyed to the brain. The lateral line system enables a fish to monitor water currents, pressure waves produced by moving objects, and low-frequency sounds conducted through water.

The lateral line system functions only in water. In terrestrial vertebrates, the inner ear has evolved as the main organ of hearing and equilibrium. Some amphibians have a lateral line system as tadpoles, but not as adults living on land. In the ear of a terrestrial frog or toad, sound vibrations traveling in the air are conducted to the inner ear by a tympanic membrane on the body surface and a single middle ear bone. There also is evidence that the lungs of a frog vibrate in response to sound and transmit their vibrations to the eardrum via the auditory tube. A small side pocket of the saccule functions as the main hearing organ of the frog, and it is this outgrowth of the saccule that gave rise to the more elaborate cochlea during the evolution of mammals. Birds also have a cochlea, but like amphibians and reptiles, sound is conducted from the tympanic membrane to the inner ear by a single bone, the stapes.




