
 Embryonic development of the vertebrate brain reflects its evolution from three anterior bulges of the neural tube

We begin studying the vertebrate brain by examining its embryonic development from the neural tube (see FIGURE 47.11). In all vertebrates, three bilaterally symmetrical, anterior bulges of the dorsal hollow nerve cord--the forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain--become evident as the neural tube differentiates (FIGURE 48.19a). In the course of vertebrate evolution, the brain became further divided structurally and functionally. This regionalization provided additional capacity for complex integration, with the forebrain becoming much larger in birds and mammals than in fishes, amphibians, and reptiles. The cerebrum, the most sophisticated center of homeostatic control and integration, is an outgrowth of the forebrain that surrounds many of the older brain regions.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-19. Embryonic development of the brain.

By the fifth week of human embryonic development, five brain regions have formed from the three primary bulges (FIGURE 48.19b). Two of these regions, the telencephalon and the diencephalon, develop from the forebrain. A single region, the mesencephalon, develops from the midbrain (and is also called the midbrain in the adult). Two regions, called the metencephalon and myelencephalon, develop from the hindbrain.

As a human brain develops further, the most profound changes occur in the telencephalon, the division of the forebrain that gives rise to the cerebrum (FIGURE 48.19c). Rapid, expansive growth of this region during the second and third months creates the two halves of the cerebrum, called the right and left cerebral hemispheres, which extend over and around many of the other brain centers. In the adult, the cerebral hemispheres include white matter (tracts of axons), internal gray matter (nuclei, or clusters of neuron cell bodies), and a highly convoluted outer region of gray matter called the cerebral cortex. Major brain centers that develop from the diencephalon--the division of the forebrain that evolved earliest in vertebrate history--are the thalamus, epithalamus, and hypothalamus.

The three regions derived from the midbrain and hindbrain give rise to structures deep within the brain that are collectively called the brainstem. The adult brainstem consists of the midbrain (from the mesencephalon), the pons (from the metencephalon), and the medulla oblongata (from the myelencephalon). The metencephalon also gives rise to another major brain center, the cerebellum, which is not part of the brain stem. FIGURE 48.20 reviews brain anatomy in a three-dimensional view.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-20. The main parts of the human brain.




