
 Pteridophytes provide clues to the evolution of roots and leaves





One reason plant biologists study the morphology of ferns and other seedless plants is to explore some of the terrestrial adaptations that evolved in vascular plants, including true roots and leaves.

Most pteridophytes have true roots with lignified vascular tissue. The vascular system in these roots resembles that of the stems of early vascular plants, some of which left fossils so well preserved that researchers can study their internal tissues. This suggests that pteridophyte roots probably evolved from the lowermost, subterranean portions of stems of ancient vascular plants. It is uncertain whether roots of seed plants (gymnosperms and angiosperms) arose independently, rather than being homologous to pteridophyte roots.

Lycophytes, the modern vascular plants that diverged earliest in plant phylogeny, have small leaves with only a single unbranched vein. These leaves probably evolved from tissue flaps on the surface of stems into which a strand of vascular tissue grew. Such leaves are known as microphylls (meaning "small leaves") (FIGURE 29.22a). In contrast, leaves of other modern vascular plants are known as megaphylls because they are typically much larger (FIGURE 29.22b). Their increased size is possible because such leaves are served by a highly branched vascular system. A branched vascular system can supply an expanded leaf with water and minerals and can export sugar from the photosynthetic tissue of the larger leaves. Thus, the branched vascular systems of megaphylls support a greater photosynthetic productivity compared to microphylls.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 29-22. Hypotheses for the evolution of leaves.

The study of fossils suggests that megaphylls evolved from a series of branches lying close together on a stem. Hypothetical stages in such a megaphyll origin were a flattening of the branch system and the development of tissue webbing that joined branches (see FIGURE 29.22b). According to this hypothesis, megaphylls could not have evolved in plants that lacked branched sporophytes and lignified vascular tissue. Thus, the evolution of true, branched stems likely preceded the origin of large leaves and roots (which probably evolved from the bases of stems).




