
 Biotechnology is transforming agriculture

Eight hundred million people on earth suffer from nutritional deficiencies. Forty thousand people die each day of malnutrition, half of them children. Disagreements exist over the causes of such hunger. Some argue that food shortages arise not from a lack of food production but from inequities in distribution: The dire poor simply cannot afford food. Others regard food shortages as evidence that the world is overpopulated--that the human species has exceeded the carrying capacity of the planet (see Chapter 52). Whatever the social and demographic causes of starvation, increasing food production seems like a humane objective. Because land and water are the most limiting resources for food production, the best option will be to increase yields on the available land. Indeed, there is very little "extra" land that can be put to the plow, especially if the few remaining pockets of wilderness are to be conserved. Based on conservative estimates of population growth, the world's farmers will have to produce 40%  more grain per hectare to feed the human population in 2020. Plant biotechnology could help make these crop yields possible.

Already, the commercial adoption by farmers of transgenic crops has been one of the most rapid cases of technology transfer in the history of agriculture. Between 1996 and 1999, the area planted commercially with transgenic crops increased from 1.7 to 39.9 million hectares. These crops include transgenic varieties and hybrids of cotton, maize, and potatoes that contain genes from the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis. These "transgenes" encode for a protein (Bt toxin) that effectively controls a number of serious insect pests. The use of such plant varieties greatly reduces the need for spraying crops with chemical insecticides. Considerable progress also has been made in the development of transgenic plants of cotton, maize, soybeans, sugar beet, and wheat that are tolerant to a number of herbicides. The cultivation of these plants could lower production costs and enable farmers to "weed" crops with herbicides (which won't damage the transgenic crop plants) instead of by heavy tillage, which can cause erosion of soil. Researchers are also engineering transgenic plants with enhanced resistance to disease. In one case, a transgenic papaya resistant to a ringspot virus was introduced into Hawaii, thereby saving the papaya industry (FIGURE 38.20). The nutritional quality of plants is also being improved. "Golden Rice," a transgenic variety with a few daffodil genes that increase quantities of vitamin A, was specifically designed to prevent the blindness that develops in many of the world's poor whose diet is chronically deficient in vitamin A (see FIGURE 20.20).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 38-20. Genetically engineered papaya. A ringspot virus devastated papaya cultivation worldwide. A transgenic papaya variety rescued the industry. The genetically engineered papaya on the right is more resistant to ringspot virus than the nontransgenic papaya on the left.




