
 "Evo-devo" may clarify our understanding of the Cambrian diversification

What sparked the Cambrian explosion? There are three main hypotheses for what caused the diversification of animals:

Ecological Causes: The main variation on this hypothesis emphasizes the emergence during the Cambrian of predator-prey relationships. Such a change in the dynamics of biological communities would lead to a diversity of evolutionary adaptations such as various kinds of protective shells and diverse modes of locomotion.

Geologic Causes: Perhaps, for example, atmospheric oxygen finally reached a high enough concentration during the Cambrian to support the more active metabolism required for the feeding and other activities of mobile animals.

Genetic Causes: Much of the diversity in body form we observe among the 35 or so animal phyla is associated with variations in the spatial and temporal expression of Hox genes within developing embryos (see FIGURE 21.15). Thus, it is a reasonable hypothesis that the diversification of animals was associated with the evolution of the Hox complex of regulatory genes, which led to variation in morphology during embryonic development. In fact, the Cambrian explosion is a major interest of many of the biologists working in the field of "evo-devo," the new synthesis of evolutionary biology and developmental biology.

These three major hypothetical causes of the Cambrian explosion are not mutually exclusive. The relatively rapid radiation of animal phyla over a half-billion years ago may have been a product of multiple causes, both external (geologic change and ecological change) and internal (genetic change).

Some of the systematists studying animal phylogeny interpret the molecular data to mean that the Cambrian radiation was actually three explosions, not just one. Within each of the three main branches of bilateral animals--Lophotrochozoa, Ecdysozoa, and Deuterostomia--the relationships among the phyla are difficult to resolve based on differences in SSU-rRNA. For example, one cannot tell from the molecular data whether, among the lophotrochozoans, flatworms are more closely related to mollusks or to annelids. This tight clustering of the nucleic acid sequences is consistent with a rapid diversification of phyla within each of the three major clades of bilateria. However, the molecular differences between those three great clades are relatively extensive and suggest that they branched apart very early, probably in the Precambrian. This deep branching of the bilateria may have been associated with the evolution of the Hox complex, but then geologic and/or ecological changes during the early Cambrian may have driven the diversification of phyla within each major clade (FIGURE 32.14).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 32-14. One Cambrian explosion, or three? The Cambrian explosion may actually have been a secondary diversification of each of three major body plans that evolved during the Precambrian.

Apparently, by the end of the Cambrian radiation, the animal phyla were locked into developmental patterns that constrained evolution enough that no additional phyla evolved after that period. Of course, this does not imply that animal evolution came to a halt; variations in developmental patterns continue to allow subtle changes in body structures and functions, leading to speciation and the origin of taxa below the phylum level.

Continuing research will help test these hypotheses. But even as the Cambrian explosion becomes less mysterious, it will seem no less wonderful. In the last half-billion years, animal evolution has mainly generated new variations on old "designs." In Chapters 33 and 34 we take a closer look at the extant animal phyla and their evolutionary history.




