
 In response to a signal, a cell may regulate activities in the cytoplasm or transcription in the nucleus

Ultimately, a signal-transduction pathway leads to the regulation of one or more cellular activities. In the cytoplasm, a signal may cause, for example, the opening or closing of an ion channel in the plasma membrane or a change in cell metabolism. As we have discussed already, the response of liver cells to signaling by the hormone epinephrine helps regulate cellular energy metabolism. The final step in the signaling pathway activates the enzyme that catalyzes the breakdown of glycogen. FIGURE 11.16 shows the complete pathway leading to the release of glucose-1-phosphate from glycogen.

Many other signaling pathways ultimately regulate not the activity of enzymes but the synthesis of enzymes or other proteins, usually by turning specific genes on or off in the nucleus. Like an activated steroid receptor (see FIGURE 11.10), the final activated molecule in a signaling pathway may function as a transcription factor. In FIGURE 11.17, you see an example where a signaling pathway activates a transcription factor that turns a gene on: The response to the growth-factor signal is the synthesis of mRNA that will be translated in the cytoplasm into a specific protein. In other cases, the transcription factor might regulate a gene by turning it off. Often a transcription factor regulates several different genes.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-17. Nuclear response to a signal: the activation of a specific gene by a growth factor. This diagram is a simplified representation of a typical signaling pathway that leads to the regulation of gene activity in the cell nucleus. The initial signal molecule, a local regulator called a growth factor, triggers a phosphorylation cascade. (The ATP molecules that serve as sources of phosphate are not shown.) The last kinase in the sequence enters the nucleus and there activates a gene-regulating protein, a transcription factor. This protein stimulates a specific gene to be transcribed into mRNA, which then directs the synthesis of a particular protein in the cytoplasm.

All the different kinds of signal receptors and relay molecules introduced in this chapter participate in various gene-regulating pathways, as well as in pathways leading to other kinds of responses. The molecular messengers that produce gene regulation responses include growth factors and certain plant and animal hormones. Malfunctioning of growth-factor pathways like the one in FIGURE 11.17 can cause cancer, as we will see in Chapter 19.




