
 The structure of a community may be controlled bottom-up by nutrients or top-down by predators

Simplified models based on relationships between adjacent trophic levels are useful for discussing how communities of plants, animals, and other organisms might be organized. For example, consider the three possible relationships between plants (V for vegetation) and herbivores (H): The arrows indicate that a change in the biomass (total weight) of one trophic level causes a change in the other trophic level. For example, VH means that an increase in vegetation will impact (increase) the numbers or biomass of herbivores, but not vice versa. In this situation, herbivores are limited by vegetation, but vegetation is not limited by herbivory. In contrast, VH means that an increase in herbivore biomass will have an impact on vegetation (decreasing it), but not vice versa. A double arrow indicates that feedback flows in both directions, with each trophic level sensitive to changes in the biomass of the other.

Based on these possible interactions, we can distinguish two models of community organization: the bottom-up model and the top-down model. The bottom-up model postulates VH linkages. In this case, mineral nutrients (N) control community organization because the nutrients control plant (V) numbers, which control herbivore (H) numbers, which in turn control predator (P) numbers. The simplified bottom-up model is thus NVHP. If you want to change the community structure of a bottom-up community, you need to alter biomass at the lower trophic levels. For example, if you add mineral nutrients to stimulate growth of vegetation, then all the other trophic levels should also increase in biomass. But if you add predators or remove predators from a bottom-up community, the effect will not extend down to the lower trophic levels.

In contrast, the top-down model postulates that it is mainly predation that controls community organization because predators control herbivores, which in turn control plants, which in turn control nutrient levels. The simplified top-down model is thus NVHP. This top-down control of community structure is also called the trophic cascade model. It predicts a cascade of +/- effects down the trophic levels. Increasing predators will depress herbivore numbers, the depressed herbivore numbers will have a reduced impact on plant abundance, and the abundant plants will depress levels of mineral nutrients. For example, in a lake community with four trophic levels, the trophic cascade model predicts that removing the top carnivores will increase the abundance of primary carnivores, decrease herbivores, increase phytoplankton, and eventually decrease concentrations of mineral nutrients. If there were only three trophic levels in a lake, removing the primary carnivores would increase the herbivores and decrease the phytoplankton, causing nutrient levels to rise. The effects of any manipulation will thus move down the trophic structure as a series of +/- effects.

Many other models intermediate between the bottom-up and top-down extremes are possible. For example, all the interactions between trophic levels could be reciprocal (). The value of these simplified models is that they provide a starting point for the analysis of communities. Let's look at one example where ecologists have applied these models to counter pollution problems in lakes.

Pollution has degraded the freshwater lakes in many countries. Because many freshwater lake communities seem to be structured according to the top-down, or trophic cascade, model, ecologists have a potential method for improving water quality. In lakes with four trophic levels, for example, adding top predators should improve water quality by reducing algal populations. In lakes with three trophic levels, removing fish should improve water quality. We can summarize this strategy for lake restoration, called biomanipulation, with this diagram.






One of the largest biomanipulations of food webs so far was the Lake Vesij&auml;rvi experiment in southern Finland. Vesij&auml;rvi is a large (110 km2), shallow lake that was heavily polluted with city sewage and industrial wastewater until 1976. Pollution controls then stopped these inputs, and the lake began to recover in water quality. But by 1986, massive blooms of cyanobacteria began to occur. These algal blooms coincided with a very dense population of roach, a plankton-eating fish that had accumulated during the years of mineral nutrient (pollution) input. Roach eat zooplankton, and by reducing zooplankton, they also reduced herbivory on cyanobacteria and other algae, which then increased in abundance. To reverse these changes, ecologists removed 1,018 tons of fish from Lake Vesijrvi between 1989 and 1993, reducing roach to about 20%  of their former abundance. At the same time, the ecologists began to stock the lake with pike perch, a predatory fish that eats roach. This added a fourth trophic level to the lake. Biomanipulation was a success in Lake Vesijrvi. The water became clear, and cyanobacterial blooms ended in 1989. The lake continues to remain clear even though the roach removal was stopped in 1993.

Communities will vary in the relative degree of top-down and bottom-up control, and we should not assume that one model will fit all communities. If humans are to manage agricultural landscapes, national parks, reservoirs, and marine fisheries, we need to understand the dynamics of the community we are attempting to manage. This is just one example of how basic ecological research can help us evaluate environmental issues.




