
 Phylogenetic trees are hypotheses

Considering how most of us struggle to understand biological complexity, especially in molecular biology, it is certainly not intuitive that parsimony should be our guide. Given a choice of many possible phylogenetic trees that we could draw based on DNA sequence data, why should we prefer the one with the fewest number of evolutionary changes as our best hypothesis for the relationships among a set of species? The rationale is that for any of a species' characters, whether molecular or morphological, hereditary fidelity is more common than change. At the molecular level, point mutations do occasionally change a base within a DNA sequence. But exact transmission of the sequence from generation to generation is thousands of times more common than change. The same rationale applies to morphology. For example, humans and apes share a number of skeletal novelties not found in other primates (the mammalian order that includes monkeys, apes, and humans). We could construct a primate phylogeny that places humans and apes on relatively distant clades. However, such a cladogram would assume the unnecessarily complicated scenario that a whole set of skeletal changes evolved twice in separate ancestors instead of just once in an ancestor common to apes and humans. The most parsimonious cladogram of primates, whether based on morphological or molecular data, places humans and apes as very close relatives.

This is a good time to reinforce the point that any phylogenetic diagram is a hypothesis. Given a choice of possible trees we can draw for a set of species or higher taxa, the best hypothesis is the one that is the best fit for all the available data. In the absence of conflicting information, the most parsimonious tree is the logical choice among alternative hypotheses. But sometimes there may be compelling evidence that the best hypothesis is a phylogeny that is not the most parsimonious. Perhaps the particular morphological or molecular character we are using to sort taxa actually did evolve multiple times. For example, both birds and mammals have hearts with four chambers (two atria and two ventricles; see Chapter 42). And we know from the fossil record that both birds and mammals evolved from reptiles. The parsimonious assumption for the four-chambered heart would be that it evolved once and was present in a reptilian ancestor common to birds and mammals (FIGURE 25.16a). But abundant evidence indicates that birds and mammals evolved from different reptilian ancestors. Thus, the four-chambered heart evolved at least twice in vertebrate history. This fact is inconsistent with the tree in FIGURE 25.16a, but consistent with the tree in FIGURE 25.16b.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 25-16. Parsimony and the analogy-versus-homology pitfall. The tree in (a) places a bird and a mammal on a clade that excludes the lizard. The tree in (b) recognizes a lizard-bird clade. If we made the mistake of interpreting the four-chambered hearts of birds and mammals as homologous instead of analogous, we might opt for the tree in (a) as our most parsimonious hypothesis. In fact, an abundance of evidence supports the hypothesis that birds and lizards are closer relatives than birds and mammals.

In this example of vertebrate hearts, the problem is not so much with the principle of parsimony as it is with the analogy-homology issue; the four-chambered hearts of birds and mammals are analogous, not homologous. A matching change of bases in DNA sequences in two species can also occur independently; parsimony only suggests that such double changes in molecular evolution are less likely than inheritance of a single change from a common ancestor. The practice of parsimony in molecular systematics is more reliable if a phylo genetic tree is based on a large database of DNA sequence comparisons for the set of species in the tree. Similarly, occasionally misjudging an analogous similarity in morphology as a shared derived homology is less likely to distort a phylogenetic tree if each clade in the tree is defined by several derived characters. And the strongest phylogenetic hypotheses of all are those supported by both the molecular and morphological evidence, and, if it exists, by the fossil evidence.




