
 Parathyroid hormone and calcitonin balance blood calcium

The four parathyroid glands, embedded in the surface of the thyroid, function in the homeostasis of calcium ions. They secrete parathyroid hormone (PTH), which raises blood levels of Ca2+ and thus has an effect opposite to that of the thyroid hormone calcitonin. A lack of PTH causes blood levels of calcium to drop dramatically, leading to convulsive contractions of the skeletal muscles. If unchecked, this condition, known as tetany, is fatal. Calcium ions, in appropriate concentration, are essential to the normal functioning of all cells.

PTH raises the level of blood Ca2+ by direct and indirect effects on bone and kidney. In bone, PTH induces specialized cells called osteoclasts to decompose the mineralized matrix of bone and release Ca2+ to the blood. In the kidneys, PTH has two effects: It stimulates reabsorption of Ca2+ through the renal tubules, and it activates the conversion of vitamin D to its active form. An inactive form of vitamin D, a steroid-derived molecule, is obtained from food or synthesized in the skin and then activated sequentially in the liver and the kidneys. The active form of vitamin D functions as a hormone. It acts in concert with PTH in bone, and it also affects the intestines, where it stimulates the uptake of Ca2+ from food. For hormonal action, vitamin D binds to receptors in the nuclei of target cells and regulates gene transcription.

When blood calcium rises above a certain level, calcitonin comes into play. It has effects on bone and kidneys opposite to those of PTH and thus decreases blood Ca2+. The control of blood calcium level is an example of how homeostasis is often maintained by the balancing of two antagonistic hormones--in this case, PTH and calcitonin. In classic feedback fashion, these two hormones balance each other's effects, thereby minimizing fluctuations in the concentration of calcium in the blood (FIGURE 45.9).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 45-9. Hormonal control of calcium homeostasis in mammals. A negative feedback system involving two antagonistic hormones, calcitonin and parathyroid hormone (PTH), maintains the concentration of calcium in blood very close to 10 mg/100mL. A rise in blood Ca2+ induces the thyroid gland to secrete calcitonin, which lowers the Ca2+ concentration by increasing bone deposition and reducing reabsorption in the kidneys. (By interfering with PTH, the calcitonin also helps reduce Ca2+ uptake by the intestines, not shown.) These effects are reversed by PTH, which is secreted from the parathyroid glands when the concentration of blood Ca2+ falls below the set point. Blood calcium levels begin to increase as target cells in the bones and kidneys respond to PTH. In addition to stimulating Ca2+ uptake in these organs directly, PTH also acts indirectly by helping activate vitamin D in the kidneys. The active form of vitamin D then stimulates the intestines to increase Ca2+ uptake from food. But blood Ca2+ will rise only so far before the thyroid counters by secreting more calcitonin.




