
 Modern technology offers solutions for some reproductive problems

Recent scientific and technological advances have made it possible to deal with problems of reproduction in striking ways. For example, it is now possible to diagnose many genetic diseases and congenital (present at birth) disorders while the fetus is in the uterus. Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling are invasive techniques in which amniotic fluid or fetal cells are obtained for genetic analysis (see FIGURE 14.17). Noninvasive procedures usually use high-frequency sound waves, or ultrasound imaging, to detect fetal condition (FIGURE 46.22). An alternate new technique relies on the fact that a few fetal blood cells leak across the placenta into the mother's bloodstream. A blood sample from the mother yields enough fetal cells that can be identified with specific antibodies (which bind to proteins on the surface of fetal cells) and then tested for genetic disorders.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 46-22. Ultrasound imaging. This color-enhanced image shows a fetus in the uterus at about 18 weeks. The image is produced on a computer screen when high-frequency sounds from an ultra-sound scanner held against a pregnant woman's abdomen bounce off the fetus.

Diagnosing genetic diseases of fetuses poses important ethical questions. To date, essentially all detectable disorders remain untreatable in the uterus, and many cannot be corrected even after birth. Parents may be faced with difficult decisions about whether to terminate a pregnancy or cope with a child who may have profound defects and a short life expectancy. These are complex issues that demand careful, informed thought and competent counseling.

In the past 25 years, several techniques have been developed to assist childless couples who want to have offspring. For cases of male infertility, sperm from anonymous donors are widely available from sperm banks. Sperm are deposited in the vagina or cervix when it is possible for the woman to conceive. Another procedure, called in vitro fertilization, was developed for women whose oviducts are blocked. Ova are surgically removed following hormonal stimulation of the follicles. The ova are then fertilized in culture dishes in a laboratory. After about 2half; days, when the embryo has reached the eight-cell stage, it is placed in the uterus and allowed to implant. In vitro fertilization is costly but has a success rate similar to the pregnancy rate resulting from insemination by sexual intercourse. Embryos can be frozen for later use if the first attempt is unsuccessful. A couple may choose to have oocytes obtained from another woman fertilized with the male partner's sperm, although more serious ethical issues must be resolved when donors are used. Thousands of children have thus far been conceived by in vitro fertilization, and there is no evidence of any abnormalities associated with this procedure.

One area of reproductive research that has traditionally received little attention is male contraception. Male chemical contraceptives have proved elusive. Testosterone will block the release of pituitary gonadotropins, but testosterone itself stimulates spermatogenesis. Estrogens are effective, but they inhibit sex drive and can be feminizing. The best prospects so far are for antagonists of GnRH, which are potent inhibitors of spermatogenesis. Several experimental drugs and birth control techniques for both men and women are currently being tested.

In this chapter we have considered the structural and physiological bases of animal reproduction. The next chapter focuses on the mechanics of development that transform a zygote into an animal form and on other topics in animal development.




