
 Homeostasis depends on feedback circuits

Any homeostatic control system has three functional components: a receptor, a control center, and an effector. The receptor detects a change in some variable of the animal's internal environment, such as change in body temperature. The control center processes information it receives from the receptor and directs an appropriate response by the effector. As a nonliving example of how these components interact, consider how the temperature of a room is controlled (FIGURE 40.9a). In this case, the control center, called a thermostat, also contains the receptor (a thermometer). When room temperature falls below a set point, say 20&#176;C, the thermostat switches on the heater (the effector). When the thermometer detects a temperature above the set point, the thermostat switches the heater off. This type of control circuit is called negative feedback, because a change in the variable being monitored triggers the control mechanism to counteract further change in the same direction. Owing to a lag time between reception and response, the variable drifts slightly above and below the set point, but the fluctuations are moderate. Negative-feedback mechanisms prevent small changes from becoming too large. Most homeostatic mechanisms in animals operate on this principle of negative feedback.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 40-9. An example of negative feedback: control of temperature. Regulating either (a) room or (b) body temperature depends on a control center that detects temperature change and activates mechanisms that reverse that change.

Our own body temperature is kept close to a set point of 37&#176;C by the cooperation of several negative-feedback circuits that regulate energy exchange with the environment (FIGURE 40.9b). One of these involves sweating as a means to dispose of metabolic heat and cool the body. A thermostat in the brain monitors the temperature of the blood. If the thermostat detects a rise in body temperature above the set point, it sends nerve impulses directing sweat glands to increase their production of sweat, thereby lowering body temperature by evaporative cooling (see FIGURE 3.4). When body temperature drops below the set point, the thermostat in the brain stops sending the signals to the glands, and the body retains more of the heat produced by metabolism. We will see several examples of negative feedback in the chapters that follow.

In contrast to negative feedback, positive feedback involves a change in some variable that triggers mechanisms that amplify rather than reverse the change. During childbirth, for instance, the pressure of the baby's head against sensors near the opening of the uterus stimulates uterine contractions, which cause greater pressure against the uterine opening, heightening the contractions, which causes still greater pressure. Positive feedback brings childbirth to completion, a very different sort of process from maintaining a steady state.

It is important not to overstate the concept of a constant internal environment. In fact, regulated change is essential to normal body functions. In some cases the changes are cyclical, such as the changes in hormone levels responsible for the menstrual cycle in women (see Chapter 46). In other cases a regulated change is a reaction to a challenge to the body. For example, the human body reacts to certain infections by raising the set point for temperature to a slightly higher level, and the resulting fever helps fight the infection. Over the short term, homeostatic mechanisms keep body temperature close to a set point, whatever it is at that particular time. But over the longer term, homeostasis allows regulated change in the body's internal environment.

Internal regulation is expensive. Anyone who pays utility bills is aware of the energy costs for heating or cooling a home to maintain a comfortable interior temperature. Similarly, animals use a considerable portion of the energy from the food they eat to maintain favorable internal conditions. Animals must manage their energy resources not only for homeostasis, but for everything else they do, including movement, defense against disease, and reproduction. Let's take a closer look at some basic concepts of animal energetics.




