
Chapter 51: BEHAVIORAL BIOLOGY

INTRODUCTION TO BEHAVIOR AND BEHAVIORAL ECOLOGY

   What is behavior?

   Behavior has both proximate and ultimate causes

   Behavior results from both genes and environmental factors

   Innate behavior is developmentally fixed

   Classical ethology presaged an evolutionary approach to behavioral biology

   Behavioral ecology emphasizes evolutionary hypotheses



LEARNING

   Learning is experience-based modification of behavior

   Imprinting is learning limited to a sensitive period

   Bird song provides a model system for understanding the development of behavior

   Many animals can learn to associate one stimulus with another

   Practice and exercise may explain the ultimate bases of play



ANIMAL COGNITION

   The study of cognition connects nervous system function with behavior

   Animals use various cognitive mechanisms during movement through space

   The study of consciousness poses a unique challenge for scientists



SOCIAL BEHAVIOR AND SOCIOBIOLOGY

   Sociobiology places social behavior in an evolutionary context

   Competitive social behaviors often represent contests for resources

   Natural selection favors mating behavior that maximizes the quantity or quality of mating partners

   Social interactions depend on diverse modes of communication

   The concept of inclusive fitness can account for most altruistic behavior

   Sociobiology connects evolutionary theory to human culture

The study of animal behavior is undoubtedly one of the oldest branches of biology. Tens of thousands of years ago, behavioral knowledge was essential to human survival. By learning the habits of the animals around them, early humans increased their chances of securing a meal and decreased their chances of becoming a meal. Thus, our ancestors' awareness of animal behavior ultimately enhanced their Darwinian fitness. More generally, our own behavior, as well as that of other animals, has its ultimate basis in evolution.

Consider the male magnolia warbler in the photograph on this page. To our ears, his song is a musical "weete, weete, weetchew," with the last note slurring upward. However, as one experienced birder is fond of telling novices, "It's not music to a bird's ears. Birds sing for practical reasons--to attract mates, to let other males or females know where they are, to hold a territory where they can raise and feed their young. For birds, singing is about survival and passing genes to the next generation."

Bird song provides an excellent introduction to the subject of behavior. For one thing, bird song is amenable to modern experimental methods. As a result, biologists are beginning to understand a great deal about development, functions, and consequences of bird song. Bird song is also attractive to researchers because of several striking parallels between bird song and human speech. It has also become a model system for animal behavior research because it demonstrates a very important generalization: Behavior is influenced by both genetic and environmental factors. The study of bird song has provided guideposts for the study of other complex behaviors that are less understood.

Studying an animal's behavior is essential to understanding the animal's evolution and ecological interactions. This chapter emphasizes the nature of animal behavior, how biologists study it, and the function of behavior in the relationship between an animal and its environment.




