
 Invertebrates have a rudimentary immune system

Although this chapter focuses on the immune mechanisms of vertebrates, invertebrate animals also exhibit highly effective mechanisms of host defense, which undoubtedly have contributed to their evolutionary success. The ability to make the distinction betwen self and nonself is seen in animals as ancient as the sponges. If cells from two sponges of the same species are mixed, the cells from each sponge sort themselves and reaggregate, each excluding cells from the other individual. Invertebrates also have the ability to dispose of what is not self, which they accomplish primarily by phagocytosis. In sea stars, for example, amoeboid cells called coelomocytes phagocytose foreign matter. Furthermore, immunologists have begun to find cytokines in invertebrates. For example, like mammalian macrophages, sea star coelomocytes produce interleukin-1 as they engulf foreign material. The IL-1 enhances the animal's defensive response by stimulating coelomocyte proliferation and attracting more coelomocytes to the area.

Invertebrates depend on innate, nonspecific mechanisms of defense rather than acquired, antigen-specific mechanisms like those that vertebrates accomplish with lymphocytes. However, some invertebrates possess lymphocyte-like cells that produce antibody-like molecules. Insects, for example, have a hemolymph protein, called hemolin, that binds to microbes and assists in their disposal. Hemolin is a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily, a large group of proteins that are structurally related to antibodies. Hemolin molecules do not exhibit diversity, but they are likely evolutionary precursors of vertebrate antibodies.

By and large, invertebrates do not exhibit the hallmark of acquired immunity--immunological memory. Sea star coelomocytes, for example, respond to a particular microbe with the same speed no matter how many times they have encountered that invader before. However, earthworms do appear to have a kind of immunological memory. When a portion of body wall from one worm is grafted onto another, the recipient's phagocytic cells attack the foreign tissue. The initial graft is rejected in about two weeks; a second graft from the same donor is rejected in just a few days. Comparative studies of animal immune systems continue to provide insight into the development and evolution of host defense mechanisms, as well as clues about evolutionary patterns in general.




