
 Interacting regulatory systems maintain homeostasis

Numerous regulatory systems are involved in maintaining homeostasis in an animal's internal environment. As we have seen, the mechanisms that rid the body of nitrogenous wastes operate hand in hand with those involved in osmoregulation and are often closely linked with energy budgets and temperature regulation. Similarly, the regulation of body temperature directly affects metabolic rate and exercise capacity and is closely associated with mechanisms controlling blood pressure, gas exchange, and energy balance. Under some conditions, usually at the physical extremes compatible with life, the demands of one system might come into conflict with those of other systems. For instance, in hot, dry environments, water conservation often takes precedence over evaporative heat loss. Many desert animals tolerate occasional abnormally high body temperature, which helps them save water by reducing evaporation. However, if body temperature exceeds a critical upper limit, the animal will start vigorous evaporative cooling and risk dangerous dehydration. Normally, however, the various regulatory systems act together to maintain homeostasis in the internal environment.

Our discussion of homeostasis would be incomplete without mention of the liver, the vertebrate body's most functionally diverse organ. Liver functions are pivotal to homeostasis and involve interaction with most of the body's organ systems. For example, liver cells interact with the circulatory system in taking up glucose from the blood. Liver cells store excess glucose as glycogen and, in response to the body's demand for fuel, convert glycogen back to glucose, releasing glucose to the blood. The liver also synthesizes plasma proteins important in blood clotting and in maintaining the osmotic balance of the blood. Assisting the excretory system, liver cells detoxify many chemical poisons and prepare metabolic wastes for disposal. The liver's diverse functions and interactions with other organs accentuate the point that homeostasis requires the coordinated action of several body systems.

In this chapter we have touched on some of the ways the nervous system and hormones regulate organs involved in homeostasis. We concentrate on the hormonal control of homeostasis in the next chapter.




