
 Some extinct jawless vertebrates had ossified teeth and bony armor

Jawless vertebrates are much more diverse and common in the fossil record than they are among today's fauna. A diversity of taxa informally called ostracoderms thrived from about 450 to 375 million years ago, from the Ordovician period to the late Devonian. Most species were small, less than 50 cm in length. Most lacked paired fins and apparently were bottom dwellers that wiggled along streambeds or the seafloor, but there were also some more active species with paired fins. Their mouths were circular or slitlike openings that lacked jaws. The majority of ostracoderms were probably mud-suckers or suspension feeders that took in sediments or suspended organic debris through their mouths and then passed it through the gill slits, where food was trapped. Thus, the pharyngeal apparatus retained the primitive feeding function, although gills in agnathans had probably also evolved into the major sites of gas exchange. The ostracoderms and most other agnathan groups declined and finally disappeared during the Devonian period.

Fossils of the extinct agnathans provide evidence that the process of mineralization of certain body structures evolved early in vertebrate history. Ostracoderm means "shelled skin," a reference to the armor of bony plates that encased these animals. The plates may represent an early evolutionary stage of ossification, the hardening of connective tissue that occurs when specialized cells secrete calcium and phosphate, which precipitate as calcium phosphate, a hard mineral salt. Even earlier evidence of ossification is found in fossils of ancient vertebrates called conodonts, which date back as far as 510 million years. These vertebrates are named for their coneshaped toothlike structures, which were ossified. In contrast, the mouths of hagfishes contain toothlike structures made mainly of keratin, a structural protein.

Based on cladistic analysis, most vertebrate systematists now agree that hagfishes and lampreys, though still represented in the modern fauna, are actually more primitive as vertebrates than were the conodonts and ostracoderms. The jawed vertebrates probably evolved from one of the many lineages of ostracoderms.




