
 Specific proteins facilitate the passive transport of water and selected solutes: a closer look

Let's look more closely at how water and certain hydrophilic solutes cross a membrane. As mentioned earlier, many polar molecules and ions impeded by the lipid bilayer of the membrane diffuse passively with the help of transport proteins that span the membrane. This phenomenon is called facilitated diffusion.

A transport protein has many of the properties of an enzyme. Just as an enzyme is specific for its substrate, a transport protein is specialized for the solute it transports and may even have a specific binding site akin to the active site of an enzyme. Like enzymes, transport proteins can be saturated. There are only so many molecules of each type of transport protein built into the plasma membrane, and when these molecules are translocating passengers as fast as they can, transport is occurring at a maximum rate. Also like enzymes, transport proteins can be inhibited by molecules that resemble the normal "substrate." This occurs when the imposter competes with the normally transported solute by binding to the transport protein. Unlike enzymes, however, transport proteins do not usually catalyze chemical reactions. Their function is to catalyze a physical process--the transport of a molecule across a membrane that would otherwise be relatively impermeable to the substance.

Cell biologists are still trying to learn exactly how various transport proteins facilitate diffusion. Many transport proteins simply provide corridors allowing a specific molecule or ion to cross the membrane (FIGURE 8.14a). The hydrophilic passageways provided by such channel proteins allow water molecules or small ions to flow very quickly from one side of the membrane to the other. In fact, it is water channel proteins, called aquaporins, that facilitate the massive amounts of diffusion illustrated in FIGURE 8.12. Some channel proteins function as gated channels; a stimulus causes them to open or close. The stimulus may be electrical or chemical; if chemical, it is a substance other than the one to be transported. For example, stimulation of a nerve cell by neurotransmitter molecules opens gated channels that allow sodium ions into the cell.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 8-14. Two models for facilitated diffusion.

Not all transport proteins are channel proteins. Many transport proteins seem to undergo a subtle change in shape that somehow translocates the solute-binding site across the membrane (FIGURE 8.14b). The changes in shape could be triggered by the binding and release of the transported molecule.

In certain inherited diseases, specific transport systems are either defective or missing altogether. An example is cystinuria, a human disease characterized by the absence of a protein that transports cystine and other amino acids across the membranes of kidney cells. Kidney cells normally reabsorb these amino acids from the urine and return them to the blood, but an individual afflicted with cystinuria develops painful stones from amino acids that accumulate and crystallize in the kidneys.




