
 Angiosperms and animals have shaped one another's evolution

Ever since they colonized the land, animals have influenced the evolution of terrestrial plants, and vice versa. The fact that animals must eat affects the natural selection of both animals and plants. For instance, with animals crawling and foraging for food on the forest floor, natural selection must have favored plants that kept their spores and gametophytes far above ground, rather than dropping these crucial structures to within reach of hungry animals on the ground. This, in turn, may have been a selection factor in the evolution of flying insects. On the other hand, as plants with flowers and fruits evolved, some herbivores became beneficial to the plants by carrying the pollen and seeds of plants they used as food. Certain animals became specialists at these tasks, feeding on specific plants. Natural selection reinforced these interactions, for they improved the reproductive success of both partners: The plant got pollinated and the animal got fed. The mutual evolutionary influence between two species is termed coevolution. (This definition is refined in Chapter 53.)

Pollinator-plant relationships are partly responsible for the diversity of flowers (FIGURE 30.18, p. 612). In most cases, relationships between plants and their pollinators are less specific than in the extreme coevolution between one plant species and one animal species. For example, the flowers of a particular plant species may be adapted for attracting insects rather than birds, but many different insect species may serve as pollinators. Conversely, a single animal species--a honeybee species, for example--may pollinate many different plant species. But even in these less specific relationships, flower color, fragrance, and structure often reflect specialization for a particular taxonomic group of pollinators, such as diverse species of bees or hummingbirds.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 30-18. Flower-pollinator relationships. (a) Scottish broom flower and honeybee. This honeybee is harvesting pollen and nectar (a sugary solution secreted by flower glands) from a Scottish broom flower. The flower has a tripping mechanism that arches the stamens over the bee and dusts it with pollen, some of which will rub off onto the stigma of the next flower the bee visits. (b) Floral tubes and hummingbird. The long, thin beak and tongue of this rufous hummingbird enable the animal to probe flowers that secrete nectar deep within floral tubes. Before the hummer leaves, anthers will dust its beak and head feathers with pollen. Many flowers that are pollinated by birds are red or pink, colors to which bird eyes are especially sensitive. (c) Fragrance and nighttime pollinators. Some angiosperms, such as this baobab tree, depend mainly on nocturnal pollinators, including bats. Common adaptations of such plants include large, light-colored, highly fragrant flowers that nighttime pollinators can locate.

Relationships between angiosperms and animals are also evident in the edible fruits of angiosperms, as discussed earlier in the chapter. Again, we see that one of the keys to angiosperm success has been interaction with animals.




