
 Mycetozoa: Slime molds have structural adaptations and life cycles that enhance their ecological roles as decomposers

Mycetozoa translates as "fungus animals," though these protists are neither fungi nor animals. The common name, slime molds, reinforces the misconception that these organisms are true fungi. But any resemblance to fungi is analogous, not homologous--an evolutionary convergence of adaptations for decomposing leaf litter and other organic refuse. In fact, if we were classifying protists strictly on the basis of their modes of motility, it would make sense to group the slime molds with the amoebas. Slime molds use pseudopodia for movement and feeding. And slime molds may in fact be phylogenetically close to some of the other amoeboid protists, especially forms such as Amoeba. But systematists are now nearing a consensus that slime molds represent a distinct eukaryotic kingdom, Mycetozoa. And a comparison of protein sequences places the slime molds relatively close to the fungi and animals in the eukaryotic tree (see FIGURE 28.8).

We will see that slime molds have structures that maximize exposure to their food sources, as well as complex life cycles that contribute to survival in changing habitats and facilitate dispersal to new food sources. Mycetozoa consists of two main groups: the plasmodial slime molds and the cellular slime molds.

Myxogastrida (Plasmodial Slime Molds)

The plasmodial slime molds, or myxogastrids, are more attractive than their common name implies. Many species are brightly pigmented, usually yellow or orange, but all are heterotrophic. The feeding stage of the life cycle is an amoeboid mass called a plasmodium, which may grow to a diameter of several centimeters (FIGURE 28.29). Large as it is, the plasmodium is not multicellular; it is a single mass of cytoplasm that is undivided by membranes and that contains many nuclei. This "supercell" results from mitotic divisions of the nuclei which are not followed by cytokinesis, the division of cytoplasm. In most species, the nuclei of the plasmodium are diploid and divisions are synchronous, with each of thousands of nuclei going through each phase of mitosis at the same time. Because of this characteristic, plasmodial slime molds have been used to study the molecular details of the cell cycle.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 28-29. The life cycle of a plasmodial slime mold, such as Physarum.

Within the fine channels of the plasmodium, cytoplasm streams first one way, then the other, in pulsing flows that are beautiful to watch through a microscope. The cytoplasmic streaming apparently helps distribute nutrients and oxygen. The plasmodium engulfs food particles by phagocytosis as it grows by extending pseudopodia through moist soil, leaf mulch, or rotting logs. If the habitat of a slime mold begins to dry up or there is no food left, the plasmodium ceases growth and differentiates into a stage of the life cycle that functions in sexual reproduction.

Dictyostelida (Cellular Slime Molds)

Cellular slime molds, or dictyostelids, pose a semantic question about what it means to be an individual organism. Although the feeding stage of the life cycle consists of solitary cells that function individually, when food is depleted the cells form an aggregate that functions as a unit (FIGURE 28.30, p. 572). Though the mass of cells resembles a plasmodial slime mold, the important distinction is that the cells of a cellular slime mold maintain their identity and remain separated by their membranes.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 28-30. The life cycle of a cellular slime mold (Dictyostelium).

Cellular slime molds also differ from plasmodial slime molds in being haploid organisms (only the zygote is diploid), whereas the diploid condition predominates in the life cycles of most plasmodial slime molds (compare FIGURES 28.29 and 28.30). Cellular slime molds have fruiting bodies that function in asexual reproduction. Also, most cellular slime molds have no flagellated stages.

This completes our survey of diversity and phylogenetic relationships among the eukaryotes traditionally classified as protists. We complete this chapter with a brief discussion of the origins of multicellularity.




