
 Abiotic factors affect the distribution of organisms

Patterns of geographic distributions of organisms on a global scale are a broad reflection of the influence of abiotic factors. These patterns mainly mirror regional differences in temperature, rainfall, salinity (saltiness), and light. Throughout this discussion, it is important to remember that the environment varies in both space and time. Although two regions of Earth may experience different conditions at any given time, daily and annual fluctuations of abiotic factors sometimes blur or accentuate the distinctions between those regions.

Temperature

Environmental temperature is an important factor determining the distribution of organisms because of its effect on biological processes and the inability of most organisms to regulate body temperature precisely. Cells may rupture if the water they contain freezes (at temperatures below 0&#176;C), and the proteins of most organisms denature at temperatures above 45&#176;C. In addition, few organisms can maintain a sufficiently active metabolism at very low or very high temperatures. Within a suitable range, however, most biochemical reactions and physiological processes occur more rapidly at higher temperatures. Extraordinary adaptations enable some organisms, including thermophilic prokaryotes (see Chapter 27), to live outside the temperature range habitable by other life.

The internal temperature of an organism is affected by heat exchange with its environment (see Chapter 44), and most organisms cannot maintain tissue temperatures more than a few degrees above or below the ambient temperature. As endotherms, mammals and birds are the major exceptions, but even endotherms function best within certain environmental temperature ranges, which vary with the species.

Water

Water is essential to life, but its availability varies dramatically among habitats. Freshwater and marine organisms live submerged in an aquatic environment, but they face problems of water balance if their intracellular osmolarity does not match that of the surrounding water. Organisms in terrestrial environments encounter a nearly constant threat of desiccation, and their evolution has been shaped by the requirements for obtaining and conserving adequate supplies of water.

Sunlight

Sunlight provides the energy that drives nearly all ecosystems, although only plants and other photosynthetic organisms use this energy source directly. Light intensity is not the most important factor limiting plant growth in many terrestrial environments, but shading by a forest canopy makes competition for light in the understory intense. In aquatic environments, the intensity and quality of light limit the distribution of photosynthetic organisms. Every meter of water depth selectively absorbs about 45%  of the red light and about 2%  of the blue light passing through it. As a result, most photosynthesis in aquatic environments occurs relatively near the surface. And the photosynthetic organisms themselves absorb some of the light that penetrates, further reducing light levels in the waters below.

Light is also important to the development and behavior of the many organisms that are sensitive to photoperiod, the relative lengths of daytime and nighttime. Photoperiod is a more reliable indicator than temperature for cuing seasonal events, such as flowering by plants or migration by animals.

Wind

Wind amplifies the effects of environmental temperature on organisms by increasing heat loss due to evaporation and convection (the wind-chill factor). It also contributes to water loss in organisms by increasing the rate of evaporation in animals and transpiration in plants. In addition, wind can have a substantial effect on the morphology of plants by inhibiting the growth of limbs on the windward side of trees; limbs on the leeward side grow normally, resulting in a "flagged" appearance.

Rocks and Soil

The physical structure, pH, and mineral composition of rocks and soil limit the distribution of plants and of the animals that feed upon them, thus contributing to the patchiness we see in terrestrial ecosystems. In streams and rivers, the composition of the substrate can affect water chemistry, which in turn influences the resident algae, plants, and animals. In marine environments, the structure of the substrates in the intertidal zone and on seafloors determines the types of organisms that can attach to or burrow in those habitats.

Now that we have surveyed the various factors that affect the distribution of organisms, let's focus on the major role that climate plays in structuring the biosphere.




