
 A cascade of gene activations sets up the segmentation pattern in Drosophila:a closer look

The bicoid protein and other morphogens that are products of egg-polarity genes are transcription factors, proteins that regulate the activity (transcription) of some of the embryo's own genes. Gradients of these morphogens bring about regional differences in the expression ofsegmentation genes,the genes of the embryo that direct the actual formation of segments after the embryo's major axes are defined.

In a cascade of gene activations, sequential activation of three sets of segmentation genes provides the positional information for increasingly fine details of the animal's modular body plan. First, products of thegap genesmap out the basic subdivisions along the anterior-posterior axis of the embryo (FIGURE 21.13a). Mutations in these genes cause "gaps" in the animal's segmentation. For example, one gap mutation results in an embryo lacking six abdominal segments.Pair-rule genesare the second set of segmentation genes to act. They define the modular pattern in terms of pairs of segments (FIGURE 21.13b. Mutations in pair-rule genes result in embryos having half the normal segment number because every other segment (odd or even, depending on the mutation) fails to develop. The third set of segmentation genes to act are thesegment polaritygenes, which set the anterior-posterior axis of each segment (FIGURE 21.13c). Embryos with mutations in segment polarity genes have the normal number of segments, but a part of each segment is replaced by a mirror-image repetition of some other part of the segment.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 21-13. Segmentation genes inDrosophila.Soon after fertilization, once the mother's egg-polarity genes have set up the body axes, bicoid protein and other maternal gene products initiate a cascade of activity by segmentation genes in the embryo's nuclei. These micrographs of developing fly embryos illustrate successive bands of regulatory proteins encoded by segmentation genes. The proteins are DNA-binding transcription factors that direct the division of the body into the segments characteristic of flies and other arthropods. The colors result from fluorescent dyes on antibodies bound to the segmentation gene proteins.

The products of many of the segmentation genes, like those of egg-polarity genes, are transcription factors that directly activate the next set of genes in the hierarchical scheme of pattern formation. Other segmentation genes operate more indirectly, supporting the functioning of the transcription factors in various ways. For example, some are components of cell-signaling pathways, including signal molecules used in cell-cell communication and the membrane receptors that recognize them (see Chapter 11). Cell-signaling molecules are critically important once plasma membranes have divided the embryo into separate cellular compartments.

Working together, the products of egg-polarity genes regulate the regional expression of gap genes, which control the localized expression of pair-rule genes, which in turn activate specific segment polarity genes in different parts of each segment. The boundaries and axes of the segments are now set. In the hierarchy of gene activations responsible for pattern formation, the next genes to be expressed determine the specific anatomy of each segment along the embryo.




