
 Homeostatic mechanisms manage an animal's fuel

The theme of bioenergetics is integral to our study of nutrition. As we saw in Chapter 40, the flow of food energy into and out of an animal can be viewed as a "budget," with the production of ATP accounting for the largest fraction by far of the energy budgets of most animals. The ATP powers basal or resting metabolism as well as activity and, in endotherms, temperature regulation. Nearly all of this ATP is derived from oxidation of organ ic fuel molecules--carbohydrates, proteins, and fats--in cellular respiration. The monomers of any of these substances can be used as fuel, though priority is usually given to carbohydrates and fats. Fats are especially rich in energy; the oxidation of fat liberates about twice the energy liberated from an equal amount of carbohydrate or protein.

Glucose Regulation as an Example of Homeostasis in Nutrition

When an animal takes in more calories than it needs to produce ATP, the excess can be used for biosynthesis. If the animal isn't growing in size or reproducing, the body tends to store the surplus in energy depots. In humans, the liver and muscle cells store energy in the form of glycogen, a polymer made up of many glucose units (see FIGURE 5.6b). Glucose is a major fuel molecule for cells, and its metabolism, regulated by hormone action, is an important aspect of homeostasis (FIGURE 41.1). If glycogen stores are full and caloric intake still exceeds caloric expenditure, the excess is usually stored as fat.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 41-1. Homeostatic regulation of cellular fuel. The human body regulates the use and storage of glucose, a major cellular fuel. After a meal is digested, glucose and other monomers are absorbed into the blood from the digestive tract.

When fewer calories are taken in than are expended--perhaps because of sustained heavy exercise or lack of food--fuel is taken out of storage depots and oxidized. This may cause an animal to lose weight. The human body generally expends liver glycogen first, and then draws on muscle glycogen and fat. Most healthy people--even if they are not obese--have enough stored fat to sustain them through several weeks of starvation (an average human's energy needs can be fueled by the oxidation of only 0.3 kg of fat per day).

Caloric Imbalance

Severe problems occur if the energy budget remains out of balance for long periods. If the diet of a person or other animal is chronically deficient in calories, undernourishment results. In this condition, the stores of glycogen and fat are used up, the body begins breaking down its own proteins for fuel, muscles begin to decrease in size, and the brain can become protein-deficient. If energy intake remains less than energy expenditures, death will eventually result. Even if a seriously undernourished person survives, some of the damage may be irreversible. Because a diet of a single staple such as rice or corn can often provide sufficient calories, undernourishment is generally common only where drought, war, or some other crisis has severely disrupted the food supply. Another cause of undernourishment is anorexia nervosa, an eating disorder associated with a compulsive aversion to body fat.

Detrimental effects also result from excessive food intake. In the United States and other affluent nations, overnourishment, or obesity, is a common problem. The human body hoards fat. It tends to store any excess fat molecules obtained from food instead of using them for fuel. In contrast, when we eat an excess of carbohydrates, the body tends to increase its rate of carbohydrate oxidation. Thus, the amount of fat in the diet can have a more direct effect on weight gain than the amount of dietary carbohydrates. Fat hoarding can be a liability today, but it probably provided a fitness advantage for our hunting/gathering ancestors. Individuals with genes promoting the storage of high-energy molecules during feasts may have been those that survived famines.

Obesity

Despite its propensity to store fat, the human body seems to impose limits on weight gain (and loss). Some people remain lean and hold a more-or-less constant weight no matter how much they eat. Even obese people usually attain a relatively stable weight, generally unaffected by how much they eat. Most dieters return to their former weight soon after they stop dieting. These observations, along with several recent discoveries, suggest that complex feedback mechanisms regulate fat storage and use. In mammals, a hormone called leptin, produced by adipose cells, is a key player. An increase in adipose tissue increases leptin levels in the blood. A high leptin level cues the brain to depress appetite and to increase energy-consuming muscular activity and body-heat production. Conversely, loss of body fat decreases leptin levels in the blood, signaling the brain to increase appetite and weight gain. Apparently these feedback mechanisms regulate body weight around a fairly rigid set point in some individuals and over a relatively wide range in others. Researchers have also identified some of the genes involved in fat homeostasis and several chemical signals that underlie the brain's regulatory roles (FIGURE 41.2). Some of the signals and signal antagonists are under development as potential medications for obesity.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 41-2. A ravenous rodent. This obese mouse on the left has a defect in a gene that normally produces an appetite-regulating protein. (The mouse on the right lacks the genetic defect.) Several other genes function in weight management in mammals, including humans.

Obesity may actually be beneficial in certain species. Small seabirds called petrels must fly long distances to find food. Most of the food petrel parents bring to their chicks is very rich in lipids. This minimizes the weight of the food the birds must carry during their long foraging trips (recall that fat has twice as many calories per gram as other fuels). However, in addition to energy, growing baby petrels need lots of protein for building new tissues. There is relatively little protein in their oily diet, so in order to get all the protein they need, young petrels have to consume many more calories than they burn in metabolism--and consequently they become very obese. In some petrel species, chicks at the end of the growth period weigh much more than their parents and are far too heavy to fly. These fat youngsters need to starve for several days to lose enough weight to be capable of flight. However, the fat depots in young petrels do serve an important function; the energy reserves help growing chicks survive periods when parents are unable to find enough food.




