
 Fruits help disperse the seeds of angiosperms

A fruit is a mature ovary. As seeds develop from ovules after fertilization, the wall of the ovary thickens. A pea pod is an example of a fruit, with seeds (mature ovules, the peas) encased in the ripened ovary (the pod) (FIGURE 30.15). Fruits protect dormant seeds and aid in their dispersal.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 30-15. Relationship between a pea flower and a fruit (pea pod). At the same time that the ovules are transformed into seeds, the ovary and other flower parts are transformed into a fruit we call a pod.

Various modifications in fruits help disperse seeds (FIGURE 30.16). Some flowering plants, such as dandelions and maples, have seeds within fruits that function like kites or propellers, adaptations that enhance dispersal by wind. However, many angiosperms use animals to carry seeds. Some of these plants have fruits modified as burrs that cling to animal fur (or to the clothes of humans). Other angiosperms produce edible fruits. Such fruits are usually nutritious, often sweet-tasting, and commonly vividly colored, which advertises their ripeness to certain animals. When it eats the fruit, the animal digests the fleshy part, but the tough seeds usually pass unharmed through the digestive tract. Mammals and birds may deposit seeds, along with a supply of fertilizer, miles from where the fruit was eaten.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 30-16. Fruit adaptations that enhance seed dispersal. (a) Dandelion fruit dispersed by the wind (b) Cockleburs (fruits) carried by animal fur (c) A mouse eating a berry containing seeds that will be dispersed later with the animal's feces

The fruit begins to develop after pollination triggers hormonal changes that cause the ovary to grow (see FIGURE 30.15). The wall of the ovary becomes the pericarp, the thickened wall of the fruit. As the ovary grows, the other parts of the flower wither away in many plants. If a flower has not been pollinated, fruit usually does not develop, and the entire flower withers and falls away.

Fruits are classified into several types, depending on their developmental origin (TABLE 30.1, p. 610). A fruit derived from a single ovary is called a simple fruit. A simple fruit may be fleshy, such as a cherry, or dry, such as a soybean pod. An aggregate fruit, such as a blackberry, results from a single flower that has several carpels. A multiple fruit, such as a pineapple, develops from an inflorescence, a group of flowers tightly clustered together. When the walls of the many ovaries start to thicken, they fuse together and become incorporated into one fruit.

Table 30-1. Classification of Fleshy Fruits

Type of FruitFloral OriginExampleSimpleSingle ovary of one flowerCherry



AggregateMany ovaries of one flowerRaspberry



MultipleMany ovaries of many clustered flowersPineapple



By selectively breeding plants, humans have capitalized on the production of edible fruits. The apples, oranges, and other fruits in grocery stores are exaggerated versions of much smaller natural varieties of fleshy fruits. However, the staple foods for humans are the dry, wind-dispersed fruits of grasses, which are harvested while still on the parent plant. The cereal grains of wheat, rice, corn, and other grasses are easily mistaken for seeds, but each is actually a fruit with a dry pericarp that adheres tightly to the seed coat of the single seed within.

Interactions with animals that transport pollen and seeds have helped angiosperms become the most successful plants on Earth. However, as we will see, the angiosperm life cycle was not an evolutionary "invention," but was built upon adaptive themes we have tracked in our study of plant diversity.




