
 Chromatin modifications affect the availability of genes for transcription

The organization of chromatin discussed earlier in the chapter serves a dual purpose. One function is to pack the DNA into a compact form that fits inside the nucleus of a cell. The other main function is regulatory: The physical state of DNA in or near a gene is important in helping control whether the gene is available for transcription. Thus, the genes of heterochromatin, which is highly condensed, are usually not expressed, presumably because transcription proteins cannot reach the DNA. Also, a gene's location relative to nucleosomes and to the sites where the DNA attaches to the chromosome scaffold or nuclear lamina can affect whether it is transcribed. A flurry of recent research indicates that chemical modifications of chromatin play key roles in both chromatin structure and the regulation of transcription. Especially important are DNA methylation and histone acetylation. Both are catalyzed by specific enzymes.

DNA Methylation

DNA methylation is the attachment of methyl groups (--CH3) to DNA bases after DNA is synthesized. The DNA of most plants and animals has methylated bases, usually cytosine. About 5%  of the cytosine bases in methylated eukaryotic DNA have methyl groups. Inactive DNA, such as that of inactivated mammalian X chromosomes, is generally highly methylated compared to DNA that is actively transcribed, although there are exceptions. Comparison of the same genes in different types of tissues shows that the genes are usually more heavily methylated in cells where they are not expressed. In addition, demethylating certain inactive genes (removing their extra methyl groups) turns them on.

At least in some species, DNA methylation seems to be essential for the long-term inactivation of genes that occurs during cellular differentiation in the embryo. In organisms as different as mice and Arabidopsis (a plant), deficient DNA methylation--resulting from lack of a methylating enzyme, for example--causes abnormalities in embryonic development. Once methylated, genes usually stay that way through successive cell divisions. Methylation enzymes act at DNA sites where one strand is already methylated and thus correctly methylate the daughter strand after each round of DNA replication. In this way, methylation patterns are passed on, and cells forming specialized tissues keep a chemical record of what occurred during embryonic development. A methylation pattern maintained in this way also accounts for genomic imprinting in mammals, where methylation permanently turns off either the maternal or paternal allele of certain genes at the start of development (see FIGURE 15.15).

Histone Acetylation

There is mounting evidence that histone acetylation and deacetylation play a direct role in the regulation of gene transcription. Histone acetylation is the attachment of acetyl groups (--COCH3) to certain amino acids of histone proteins; deacetylation is the removal of acetyl groups. When the histones of a nucleosome are acetylated, they change shape so that they grip the DNA less tightly. As a result, transcription proteins have easier access to genes in the acetylated region. Researchers have shown that some enzymes that acetylate or deacetylate histones are closely associated with or even components of the transcription factors that bind to promoters (see FIGURE 17.7). In other words, histone acetylation and the initiation of gene transcription seem to be coupled structurally as well as functionally. Moreover, researchers have discovered that certain proteins that bind to methylated DNA recruit histone deacetylation enzymes, thus providing a mechanism by which DNA methylation and histone deacetylation can cooperate to repress transcription. In summary, key enzymes that modify chromatin structure are apparently integral parts of the cell's machinery for regulating transcription.




