
Chapter 3: WATER AND THE FITNESS OF THE ENVIRONMENT

THE EFFECTS OF WATER'S POLARITY

   The polarity of water molecules results in hydrogen bonding

   Organisms depend on the cohesion of water molecules

   Water moderates temperatures on Earth

   Oceans and lakes don't freeze solid because ice floats

   Water is the solvent of life



THE DISSOCIATION OF WATER MOLECULES

   Organisms are sensitive to changes in pH

   Acid precipitation threatens the fitness of the environment

As astronomers study newly discovered planets orbiting distant stars, they hope to find evidence of water on these far-off worlds, for water is the substance that makes possible life as we know it here on Earth. All organisms familiar to us are made mostly of water and live in an environment dominated by water. Water is the biological medium here on Earth, and possibly on other planets as well.

Life on Earth began in water and evolved there for 3 billion years before spreading onto land. Modern life, even terrestrial (land-dwelling) life, remains tied to water. Most cells are surrounded by water, and cells themselves are about 70-95% water. Three-quarters of Earth's surface is submerged in water. Although most of this water is in liquid form, water is also present on Earth as ice and vapor. Water is the only common substance to exist in the natural environment in all three physical states of matter: solid, liquid, and gas. These three states of water are visible in the photograph on this page, a view of Earth from space.

The abundance of water is a major reason Earth is habitable. In a classic book called The Fitness of the Environment, Lawrence Henderson highlights the importance of water to life. While acknowledging that life adapts to its environment through natural selection, Henderson emphasizes that for life to exist at all, the environment must first be a suitable abode. Your objective in this chapter is to develop a conceptual understanding of how water contributes to the fitness of Earth for life.




