
 Cell signaling evolved early in the history of life

One topic of cell "conversation" is sex--at least for the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the fungus people have used for millennia for making bread, wine, and beer. Researchers have learned that cells of this yeast identify their mates by chemical signaling (FIGURE 11.1). There are two sexes, or mating types, called a and a. Cells of mating type a secrete a chemical signal called a factor, which can bind to specific receptor proteins on nearby a cells. At the same time, a cells secrete a factor, which binds to receptors on a cells. Without actually entering the cells, the receptor-bound molecules of the two mating factors cause the cells to grow toward each other and bring about other cellular changes. The result is the fusion, or mating, of two cells of opposite type. The new a/a cell contains all the genes of both original cells, a combination of genetic resources that provides advantages to this cell's descendants.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-1. Communication between mating yeast cells. Cells of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae use chemical signaling to identify cells of opposite mating type and initiate the mating process. The two mating types and their corresponding chemical signals, or "mating factors," are called a and a. The mating factors are peptides about 12 amino acids in length.

How is the mating signal at the yeast cell surface transduced, or changed, into a form that brings about the cellular response of mating? The process by which a signal on a cell's surface is converted into a specific cellular response is a series of steps called a signal-transduction pathway. Many such pathways have been extensively studied in both yeast and animal cells. Amazingly, the molecular details of signal transduction in yeast and mammals are strikingly similar, even though the last common ancestor of these two groups of organisms lived over a billion years ago. These similarities--and others recently uncovered between signaling systems in bacteria and plants--suggest that early versions of the cell-signaling mechanisms used today evolved well before the first multicellular creatures appeared on Earth. Scientists think that signaling mechanisms evolved first in ancient prokaryotes and single-celled eukaryotes and were then adopted for new uses by their multicellular descendants. Meanwhile, cell signaling has remained important in the microbial world. FIGURE 11.2 shows an example in a sophisticated modern bacterium.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-2. Communication among bacteria. Soil-dwelling bacteria called myxobacteria ("slime bacteria") use chemical signaling to share information about nutrient availability. When food is scarce, starving cells secrete a molecule that enters neighboring cells and stimulates them to aggregate. The cells form a structure that produces thick-walled spores capable of surviving until the environment improves. The bacteria shown here are Myxococcus xanthus.




