
 Many plants clone themselves by asexual reproduction

Imagine some of your fingers separating from your body, taking up life on their own, and eventually developing into entire copies of yourself. This would be an example of asexual reproduction: offspring derived from a single parent without genetic recombination (which, of course, does not actually occur in humans). The result would be a clone, a population of asexually produced, genetically identical organisms. Many plant species clone themselves by asexual reproduction, also called vegetative reproduction.

Asexual reproduction is an extension of the capacity of plants for indeterminate growth. Plants, remember, have meristematic tissues of dividing, undifferentiated cells that can sustain or renew growth indefinitely. In addition, parenchyma cells throughout the plant can divide and differentiate into the various types of specialized cells, enabling plants to regenerate lost parts. Detached fragments of some plants can develop into whole offspring; a severed stem, for instance, may develop adventitious roots and become a whole plant. Fragmentation, the separation of a parent plant into parts that re-form whole plants, is one of the most common modes of vegetative reproduction (FIGURE 38.15a). A variation of this process occurs in some species of dicots, in which the root system of a single parent gives rise to many adventitious shoots that become separate shoot systems. The result is a clone formed by asexual reproduction from one parent (FIGURE 38.15b). Such asexual propagation has produced the oldest of all known plant clones, a ring of creosote bushes in the Mojave Desert of California, believed to be at least 12,000 years old.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 38-15. Natural mechanisms of vegetative reproduction. (a) Kalanchoe is known as the maternity plant because of the numerous plantlets it produces along its leaf margins. The asexually produced plantlets fragment from their parent and become independent plants. (b) Some aspen groves, such as those shown here, are actually clones of thousands of trees descended by asexual reproduction from the root system of one parent. Notice that genetic differences among the clones result in different timing for the development of fall color and the loss of leaves.

An entirely different mechanism of asexual reproduction has evolved in dandelions and some other plants, which produce seeds without their flowers being fertilized. This asexual production of seeds is called apomixis. A diploid cell in the ovule gives rise to the embryo, and the ovules mature into seeds, which in the dandelion are dispersed by windblown fruit. Thus, though these plants clone themselves by an asexual process, they also have the advantage of seed dispersal, an adaptation usually associated with sexual reproduction.




