
 Multiple mutations underlie the development of cancer

More than one somatic mutation is generally needed to produce all the changes characteristic of a full-fledged cancer cell. This may help explain why the incidence of cancer increases greatly with age. If cancer results from an accumulation of mutations and if mutations occur throughout life, then the longer we live, the more likely we are to develop cancer.

The model of a multi-step path to cancer is well supported by studies of one of the best understood types of human cancer, colorectal cancer. About 135,000 new cases of colorectal cancer are diagnosed each year in the United States. Like most cancers, colorectal cancer develops gradually (FIGURE 19.15). The first sign is often a polyp, which is a small, benign growth in the colon lining. The cells of the polyp look normal, although they divide unusually frequently. The tumor grows and may eventually become malignant. The development of a malignant tumor is paralleled by a gradual accumulation of mutations that activate oncogenes and knock out tumor-suppressor genes. A ras oncogene and a mutated p53 tumor-suppressor gene are often involved.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 19-15. A multi-step model for the development of colorectal cancer. Affecting the colon and/or rectum, this type of cancer is one of the best understood. Changes in a tumor parallel a series of genetic changes, including mutations affecting several tumor-suppressor genes (such as p53) and the ras proto-oncogene. Mutations of tumor-suppressor genes often entail loss (deletion) of the gene. APC stands for "adenomatous polyposis coli"; mutant APC alleles are carried in many families predisposed to colorectal cancer. DCC stands for "deleted in colorectal cancer." Other mutation sequences can also lead to cancer.

About a half dozen changes must occur at the DNA level for a cell to become fully cancerous. These usually include the appearance of at least one active oncogene and the mutation or loss of several tumor-suppressor genes. Furthermore, since mutant tumor-suppressor alleles are usually recessive, mutations must knock out both alleles in a cell's genome to block tumor suppression. (Most oncogenes, on the other hand, behave as dominant alleles.) Finally, in many malignant tumors, the gene for telomerase is activated. This enzyme prevents the erosion of the ends of the chromosomes, thus removing a natural limit on the number of times the cells can divide (see pp. 299-301).

Viruses seem to play a role in about 15%  of human cancer cases worldwide. For example, retroviruses are involved in some types of leukemia, hepatitis viruses can cause liver cancer, and certain wart viruses promote the development of cancer of the cervix. Viruses contribute to cancer development by integrating their genetic material into the DNA of infected cells. By this process, a retrovirus may donate an oncogene to the cell. Alternatively, viral DNA may insert into a cellular genome in a way that disrupts a tumor-suppressor gene or converts a proto-oncogene to an oncogene.

The fact that multiple genetic changes are required to produce a cancer cell helps explain the predispositions to cancer that run in some families. An individual inheriting an oncogene or a mutant allele of a tumor-suppressor gene will be one step closer to accumulating the necessary mutations for cancer to develop.

Geneticists are now devoting much effort to finding inherited cancer alleles so that predisposition to certain cancers can be detected early in life. About 15%  of colorectal cancers, for example, involve inherited mutations. Some of these affect DNA repair genes. Many others affect a tumor-suppressor gene called APC (see FIGURE 19.15). This gene seems to have multiple functions in the cell, including regulation of cell migration and adhesion. In 1997, researchers discovered a previously unrecognized mutation in APC carried by 6%  of Ashkenazic Jews, making it the most common cancer-predisposing mutation yet found in a defined ethnic group.

Inherited alleles involved in breast cancer are also being scrutinized. Understanding the genetic basis of breast cancer is particularly important because it is the second most common type of cancer in the United States, striking over 180,000 women (and some men) each year. In 5-10%  of breast cancer cases, there is evidence of a strong inherited predisposition. In 1994 and 1995, researchers identified two genes involved in these breast cancers, BRCA1 and BRCA2 (BRCA stands for BReast CAncer). Mutations in either gene increase the risk of developing breast cancer, and of ovarian cancer as well. Both genes are considered tumor-suppressor genes because their wild-type alleles protect against breast cancer and because their mutant alleles are recessive. However, determining what the normal products of BRCA1 and BRCA2 actually do in the cell has proved very difficult. One hypothesis is that one or both proteins are involved in DNA repair. Whatever the answer, the study of these and other genes associated with inherited cancer may lead to new methods for early diagnosis and treatment of all cancers. The DNA technologies you will learn about in the next Chapter figure prominently in this research.




