
 Clonal analysis of the shoot apex emphasizes the importance of a cell's location in its developmental fate

In the process of shaping a rudimentary organ, patterns of cell division and cell expansion affect the differentiation of cells by placing them in specific locations relative to other cells. Thus, positional information underlies all the processes of development: growth, morphogenesis, and differentiation. One approach to studying the relationships among these processes is clonal analysis, in which the cell lineages (clones) derived from each cell in an apical meristem are mapped as organs develop. Researchers can do this by using radiation or chemicals to induce somatic mutations that alter chromosome number or otherwise tag a cell in some way that distinguishes it from its neighbors in the shoot tip. The lineage of cells derived by mitosis from the mutant meristematic cell will also be "marked." For example, a single cell in the shoot apical meristem may undergo a somatic mutation that prevents chlorophyll from being produced. This cell and all of its descendants will be "albino," and they will appear as a linear file of colorless cells running down the long axis of the otherwise green shoot. One of the important questions that clonal analysis can address is: How early is the developmental fate of a cell determined by its position in an embryonic structure? To some extent, the developmental fates of cells in the shoot apex are predictable. For example, almost all the cells derived from division of the outermost meristematic cells end up as part of the dermal tissue of leaves and stems. But it is not possible to pinpoint precisely which cells of the meristem will give rise to specific tissues and organs. Apparently random changes in rates and planes of cell division can reorganize the meristem. For example, the outermost cells usually divide in a plane perpendicular to the surface of the shoot tip, resulting in the addition of cells to the surface layer. But occasionally, a cell at the surface divides in a plane parallel to this meristematic layer, placing one daughter cell beneath the surface among cells derived from different lineages. Thus, the cells of the meristem are not dedicated early to forming specific tissues and organs. Put another way, a cell's developmental fate is not determined by its membership in a lineage derived from a particular meristematic cell. Rather, it is the cell's final position in an emerging organ that determines what kind of cell it will become, presumably as a result of positional information.




