
 Diverse body movements require variation in muscle activity

Everyday experience suggests that the action of a whole muscle, such as the biceps, is graded; we can voluntarily alter the extent and strength of contraction. Experimental studies also confirm that whole-muscle contractions are graded. However, at the cellular level, any stimulus that depolarizes the plasma membrane of a single muscle fiber triggers an all-or-none contraction, analogous to the response of neurons to depolarizing stimuli. How does the nervous system produce graded contractions of whole muscles? One way is by varying the frequency of action potentials in the motor neurons controlling the muscle. A single action potential will produce an increase in muscle tension lasting about 100 msec or less, a single twitch (FIGURE 49.37). If a second action potential arrives before the response to the first is over, the tension will sum and produce a greater response. If a muscle receives an overlapping series of action potentials, further summation will occur, with the level of tension depending on the rate of stimulation. And if the rate of stimulation is fast enough, the twitches will blur into one smooth and sustained contraction called tetanus (not to be confused with the disease of the same name). Motor neurons usually deliver their action potentials in rapid-fire volleys, and the resulting summation of tension results in smooth contraction typical of tetanus rather than the jerky actions of individual muscle twitches.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 49-37. Temporal summation of muscle cell contractions. This graph compares the tension developed in a muscle in response to a single action potential, a pair of action potentials, and a series of action potentials. The dashed lines show the response that would have resulted if only the first action potential had occurred.

The nervous system can also produce graded contraction of a whole muscle by taking advantage of the organization of the muscle cells into motor units. In a vertebrate muscle, each muscle cell is innervated by only one motor neuron, but each branched motor neuron may make synaptic connections with many muscle cells (FIGURE 49.38). There may be hundreds of motor neurons controlling an individual muscle, each with its own pool of muscle fibers scattered throughout the muscle. A motor unit consists of a single motor neuron and all the muscle fibers it controls. When the motor neuron fires, all the muscle fibers in the motor unit contract as a group. The strength of the resulting contraction will therefore depend on how many muscle fibers the motor neuron controls. In most muscles there is wide variation in the number of muscle fibers among motor units; some motor neurons may control only a few muscle cells, while others may control hundreds. The nervous system can thus regulate the strength of contraction in the whole muscle by both determining how many motor units are activated at a given instant and selecting whether large or small motor units are activated. Tension in a muscle can be progressively increased by activating more and more of the motor neurons controlling the muscle, a process called recruitment of motor neurons. Depending on the number and size of motor neurons your brain recruits to the task, you can lift a fork, or something much heavier, like your biology textbook.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 49-38. Motor units in a vertebrate muscle. Each muscle fiber (cell) has a single neuromuscular junction, or synaptic connection, with the motor neuron that controls it. However, each motor neuron typically branches and controls several or many muscle fibers. A motor neuron and all the fibers it controls constitute a contractile apparatus called a motor unit.

Some muscles, especially those that hold the body up and maintain posture, are almost always partially contracted. However, prolonged contraction results in muscle fatigue caused by the depletion of ATP, dissipation of the ion gradients required for normal electrical signaling, and the accumulation of lactate (see FIGURE 9.17). In a mechanism that avoids fatigue in postural muscles, the nervous system alternates activation among the various motor units making up the muscle, so that different motor units take turns maintaining the prolonged contraction.

Fast and Slow Muscle Fibers

We have seen that the action potential in a skeletal muscle fiber is only a trigger for the contraction; the actual duration of the contraction is controlled by how long the calcium concentration in the cytosol remains elevated. Not all skeletal muscle fibers are identical in this regard. We can identify fast and slow fibers based on the duration of their twitches. Fast muscle fibers are used for rapid, powerful contractions. Some, such as the flight muscles of birds, may be able to sustain long periods of repeated contractions without fatiguing. By contrast, slow muscle fibers, which can sustain long contractions, are often found in muscles that maintain posture. A slow fiber has less sarcoplasmic reticulum than a fast fiber, so calcium remains in the cytosol longer. This causes a twitch in a slow fiber to last about five times longer than in a fast fiber. Slow fibers are also specialized to make use of a steady supply of energy; they have many mitochondria, a rich blood supply, and an oxygen-storing protein called myoglobin. Myoglobin, the brownish-red pigment in the dark meat of poultry and fish, binds oxygen more tightly than hemoglobin, so it can effectively extract oxygen from the blood.

Other Types of Muscle

There are many types of muscles in the animal kingdom, but as noted before, they all share the same fundamental mechanism of contraction: the sliding of actin filaments and myosin filaments past one another. In addition to skeletal muscle, vertebrates have cardiac muscle and smooth muscle (see FIGURE 40.4).

Vertebrate cardiac muscle is found in only one place--the heart. Like skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle is striated. The primary differences between skeletal and cardiac muscle are in their electrical and membrane properties. The junctions between cardiac muscle cells contain specialized regions called intercalated discs, where gap junctions (see FIGURE 7.30) provide direct electrical coupling among cells. Thus, an action potential generated in one part of the heart will spread to all the cardiac muscle cells, and the whole heart will contract. Skeletal muscle cells will not contract unless triggered to do so by input from a controlling motor neuron. Cardiac muscle cells, however, can generate action potentials on their own, without any input from the nervous system. The plasma membrane of a cardiac muscle cell has pacemaker properties that cause rhythmic depolarizations, triggering action potentials and causing single cardiac muscle cells to "beat" even when isolated from the heart and placed in cell culture. (But at the whole-organ level, the heart also has a pacemaker, specialized muscle tissue in the wall of the right atrium that coordinates contractions of cardiac muscle cells throughout the heart; see FIGURE 42.7.) The action potentials of cardiac muscle cells are also different from those of skeletal muscle cells, lasting up to twenty times longer. Whereas the action potential of a skeletal muscle cell serves only as a trigger for contraction and does not control the duration of contraction, in a cardiac cell the duration of the action potential plays an important role in controlling the duration of contraction.

Smooth muscle lacks the striations of skeletal and cardiac muscle because the actin and myosin filaments are not all regularly arrayed along the length of the cell. Instead, the filaments may have a spiral arrangement within smooth muscle cells. Smooth muscle also contains less myosin than striated muscle, and the myosin is not associated with specific actin strands. Because of its organization, smooth muscle cannot generate nearly as much tension as striated muscle, but it can contract over a much greater range of lengths. Further, smooth muscle has neither a T tubule system nor a well-developed sarcoplasmic reticulum. Calcium ions must enter the cytosol via the plasma membrane during an action potential, and the amount reaching the filaments is rather small. Contractions are relatively slow, but there is a greater range of control than in striated muscle. Smooth muscle is found mainly in the walls of hollow organs such as digestive tract organs and blood vessels.

Invertebrates possess muscle cells similar to vertebrate skeletal and smooth muscle cells. Arthropod skeletal muscles are nearly identical to vertebrate skeletal muscles. However, the flight muscles of insects are capable of independent, rhythmic contraction, so the wings of some insects can actually beat faster than action potentials can arrive from the central nervous system. Another interesting evolutionary adaptation has been discovered in the muscles that hold clam shells closed. The thick filaments of these muscle fibers contain a unique protein called paramyosin that enables the muscles to remain in a fixed state of contraction with a low rate of energy consumption for as long as a month.

Although we have discussed sensory receptors and muscles separately in this chapter, they are part of a single integrated system linking together brain, body, and the external world. An animal's behavior, how the animal interacts with its environment, is the product of this system. Behavior is discussed in Unit Eight within the broader context of ecology, the study of interactions between organisms and their environment.




