
 Respiratory pigments transport gases and help buffer the blood

Oxygen Transport

The low solubility of oxygen in water is a fundamental problem for animals that rely on the circulatory system for oxygen delivery. Consider the situation a human would face if all oxygen had to be delivered in solution in the blood. During intense exercise a person can consume almost 2 L of oxygen per minute, and all of it must be carried in the circulation from the lungs to the active tissues. At normal body temperature and air pressure, only 4.5 mL of O2 can dissolve into a liter of blood in the lungs. If 80%  of the dissolved oxygen were delivered to the tissues (an unrealistically high percentage), the heart would need to pump 500 L of blood per minute--a ton every 2 minutes! That level of cardiac output is clearly unrealistic. In fact, most animals transport most of their oxygen bound to special proteins called respiratory pigments instead of dissolved in solution. Respiratory pigments circulate with the blood, often contained within specialized cells. The pigments greatly increase the amount of oxygen that can be carried in blood (to about 200 mL of O2 per liter in mammalian blood), and therefore greatly reduce the cardiac output necessary for oxygen transport to a manageable 20-25 L of blood per minute in our example of an exercising human.

Most animals would be unable to support their normal energy metabolism without respiratory pigments, and a diversity of these proteins have evolved in various animal taxa. One example, hemocyanin, found in the hemolymph of arthropods and many mollusks, has copper as its oxygen-binding component, coloring the blood bluish. The respiratory pigment of almost all vertebrates is the protein hemoglobin, contained in red blood cells. Hemoglobin consists of four subunits, each with a cofactor called a heme group that has an iron atom at its center. It is the iron that actually binds O2; thus, each hemoglobin molecule can carry four molecules of O2 (see FIGURE 5.23b). Like all respiratory pigments, hemoglobin must bind oxygen reversibly, loading oxygen in the lungs or gills and unloading it in other parts of the body. Loading and unloading depends on cooperation among the subunits of the hemoglobin molecule. (See Chapter 6 to review the concept of cooperativity in allosteric proteins.) The binding of oxygen to one subunit induces the remaining subunits to change their shape slightly so that their affinity for oxygen increases. And when one subunit unloads its oxygen, the other three quickly follow suit as a conformational change lowers their affinity for oxygen.

Cooperative oxygen binding and release is evident in the dissociation curve for hemoglobin (FIGURE 42.28). Over the range of oxygen partial pressures (PO2) where the dissociation curve has a steep slope, even a slight change in PO2 causes hemoglobin to load or unload a substantial amount of oxygen. Notice that the steep part of the curve corresponds to the range of oxygen partial pressures found in body tissues. When cells in a particular location begin working harder--during exercise, for instance--PO2 dips in their vicinity as the O2 is consumed in cellular respiration. Because of the effect of subunit cooperativity, a slight drop in PO2 is enough to cause a relatively large increase in the amount of oxygen the blood unloads.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-28. Oxygen dissociation curves for hemoglobin.

As with all proteins, hemoglobin's conformation is sensitive to a variety of factors. For example, a drop in pH lowers the affinity of hemoglobin for O2, an effect called the Bohr shift (FIGURE 42.28b). Because CO2 reacts with water to form carbonic acid, an active tissue will lower the pH of its surroundings and induce hemoglobin to release more oxygen, which can be used for cellular respiration.

Carbon Dioxide Transport

In addition to its role in oxygen transport, hemoglobin also helps transport carbon dioxide (FIGURE 42.29, p. 896) and assists in buffering--that is, preventing harmful changes in blood pH. Only about 7%  of the CO2 released by respiring cells is transported in solution in blood plasma. Another 23%  binds to the multiple amino groups of hemoglobin, and about 70%  is transported in the blood in the form of bicarbonate ions. Carbon dioxide from respiring cells diffuses into the blood plasma and then into the red blood cells, where it is converted to bicarbonate. Carbon dioxide first reacts with water (assisted by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase) to form carbonic acid, which then dissociates into a hydrogen ion and a bicarbonate ion. Most of the hydrogen ions attach to various sites on hemoglobin and other proteins and therefore do not change the pH of blood. The bicarbonate ions diffuse into the plasma. As blood flows through the lungs, the process is rapidly reversed as diffusion of CO2 out of the blood shifts the chemical equilibrium in favor of the conversion of bicarbonate to CO2.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-29. Carbon dioxide transport in the blood.




