
 The gametophyte is the dominant generation in the life cycles of bryophytes

In all three bryophyte phyla, gametophytes are the most conspicuous, dominant phase of life history; sporophytes are typically smaller and present only part of the time.

If bryophyte spores are dispersed to a favorable habitat, such as moist soil or tree bark, they may germinate and grow into gametophytes by mitosis (FIGURE 29.16, p. 586). Germinating moss spores typically produce a mass of green, branched, one-cell-thick filaments, known as a protonema, that is sometimes mistaken for algae. Protonemata (plural, meaning "first threads") have a large surface area, enhancing absorption of water and minerals. When sufficient resources are available, a protonema produces buds having tissue-producing meristems. These meristems generate the mature, gamete-producing structure, which is known as a gametophore ("gamete bearer"). Together, the protonema and gametophores make up the gametophyte body of a moss.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 29-16. The life cycle of Polytrichum, a moss. The gametophyte is the prevalent generation in all bryophyte life cycles, a characteristic that contrasts with other plants.

Bryophyte gametophytes are generally only one or a few cells thick, which places all cells close to water and dissolved minerals. Most bryophytes lack conducting tissues that can distribute water and organic compounds within thick tissues. Though some bryophytes do have specialized tissues that function in water and solute conduction, cell walls in these tissues lack the lignin coating that is characteristic of vascular plant xylem. The absence of lignified vascular tissues also limits the height of bryophytes, most of which are only a few centimeters tall. Thus, most bryophytes grow close to the ground, anchored by delicate, colorless rhizoids. Rhizoids are long, tubular single cells (in liverworts and hornworts) or filaments of cells (in mosses). Rhizoids are not composed of tissues, they lack specialized conducting cells, and they do not play a primary role in water and mineral absorption. In these ways, rhizoids differ from the roots of vascular plants.

The gametophytes of hornworts and some liverworts are flattened (see FIGURE 29.15a and FIGURE 29.15b) and grow close to the ground. Moss gametophytes and those of some liverworts are described as "leafy" because they have stemlike structures that bear many leaflike appendages (see FIGURE 29.15a and FIGURE 29.15c). These are not true stems and leaves because they lack lignin-coated vascular cells. Moss "leaves" are usually only one cell thick and often lack a cuticle, features that enhance water and mineral absorption from the moist environment. However, the common "hairy cap" moss Polytrichum (FIGURE 29.15c) and its close relatives have more complex "leaves" with ridges that enhance absorption of sunlight. These leaf ridges are coated with cuticle. Polytrichum and some other mosses also possess conducting tissues in the center of their "stems," and a few mosses can grow as tall as 2 m as a result. Plant biologists are still trying to determine whether the conducting tissues of mosses are homologous with vascular plant xylem and phloem or are instead the analogous result of evolutionary convergence.

When the gametophores of bryophytes are mature, they produce gametes in gametangia. Eggs are produced singly in vase-shaped archegonia, and large numbers of sperm are produced in elongate antheridia (see FIGURE 29.16). Jackets of protective tissue enclose both types of gametangia. Bryophyte gametophytes can produce many archegonia and antheridia; in mosses these are typically borne on separate male and female plants. Flagellated sperm are released into water films in which they swim toward eggs, passing down the openings of archegonia in response to chemical attractants. Eggs are not released, but remain within the bases of archegonia. Gamete fusion results in the formation of zygotes, which are also retained by the archegonia during their development into young sporophytes. Layers of placental nutritive cells help transport materials from parent gametophyte to embryos. These nutrients help support the development of embryos into mature sporophytes.




