
 Endocrine tissues of the pancreas secrete insulin and glucagon, antagonistic hormones that regulate blood glucose

The pancreas is one of many organs that perform both endocrine and exocrine functions. Endocrine cells make up only 1-2%  of the weight of the pancreas. The rest of the organ is exocrine tissue that produces bicarbonate ions and digestive enzymes that are carried to the small intestine via the pancreatic duct (see FIGURE 41.16). Scattered among this exocrine tissue are the islets of Langerhans, clusters of endocrine cells that secrete two major hormones directly into the circulatory system. Each islet has a population of alpha cells, which secrete the peptide hormone glucagon, and a population of beta cells, which secrete the hormone insulin.

Insulin and glucagon are antagonistic hormones that regulate the concentration of glucose in the blood. This is a critical bioenergetic and homeostatic function, because glucose is a major fuel for cellular respiration and a key source of carbon skeletons for the synthesis of other organic compounds. Metabolic balance depends on the maintenance of blood glucose at a concentration near a set point, which is about 90 mg/100 mL in humans. When blood glucose exceeds this level, insulin is released and acts to lower the glucose concentration. When blood glucose drops below the set point, glucagon increases glucose concentration. By negative feedback, blood glucose concentration determines the relative amounts of insulin and glucagon secreted by the islet cells (FIGURE 45.10, p. 968).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 45-10. Glucose homeostasis maintained by insulin and glucagon. A rise in blood glucose above the set point (about 90 mg/100 mL in humans) stimulates the pancreas to secrete insulin, which triggers its target cells to take up the excess glucose from the blood. Once the excess is removed and blood glucose concentration dips below the set point, the pancreas responds by secreting glucagon, which acts on the liver to raise the blood glucose level.

Insulin and glucagon both influence blood glucose concentration by multiple mechanisms. Insulin lowers blood glucose levels by stimulating virtually all body cells except those of the brain to take up glucose from the blood. (Brain cells are unusual in being able to take up glucose without insulin; as a result, the brain has access to circulating fuel molecules almost all the time.) Insulin also decreases blood glucose by slowing glycogen breakdown in the liver and inhibiting the conversion of amino acids and glycerol (from fats) to sugar.

The liver, skeletal muscles, and adipose tissues store large amounts of fuel molecules and are especially important in bioenergetics. The liver and muscles store sugar as glycogen, whereas adipose tissue cells convert sugars to fats. The liver is a key fuel-processing center because only liver cells are sensitive to glucagon. Normally, glucagon starts having an effect before blood glucose levels even drop below the set point. In fact, as soon as excess glucose is cleared from the blood, glucagon signals the liver cells to increase glycogen hydrolysis, convert amino acids and glycerol to glucose, and start slowly releasing glucose back into the circulation.

The antagonistic effects of glucagon and insulin are vital to glucose homeostasis, a mechanism that precisely manages both fuel storage and fuel use by body cells. We will revisit the topic of fuel management and see that it involves additional hormones when we study the adrenal glands in the next section. The liver's ability to perform its vital roles in glucose homeostasis results from the metabolic versatility of its cells and its access to absorbed nutrients via the hepatic portal vessel, which carries blood directly from the small intestine to the liver.

When the mechanisms of glucose homeostasis go awry, there are serious consequences. Diabetes mellitus, perhaps the best-known endocrine disorder, is caused by a deficiency of insulin or a loss of response to insulin in target tissues. The result is high blood glucose--so high, in fact, that the diabetic's kidneys excrete glucose, which explains why the presence of sugar in urine is one test for diabetes. As more glucose concentrates in the urine, more water is excreted with it, resulting in excessive volumes of urine and persistent thirst. (Diabetes, from the Greek, refers to this copious urination, and mellitus is from the Greek word for "honey," referring to the presence of sugar in the urine.) Because glucose is unavailable to most body cells as a major fuel source for diabetics, fat must serve as the main substrate for cellular respiration. In severe cases of diabetes, acidic metabolites formed during fat breakdown accumulate in the blood, threatening life by lowering blood pH.

There are actually two major forms of diabetes with very different causes. Type I diabetes mellitus (insulin-dependent diabetes) is an autoimmune disorder, in which the immune system mounts an attack on the cells of the pancreas. (Chapter 43 discusses possible causes of autoimmune reactions.) This disorder usually occurs rather suddenly during childhood, destroying the person's ability to produce insulin. Treatment consists of insulin injections, which are usually taken several times daily. Until recently, insulin for injections was extracted from animal pancreases, but genetic engineering has provided a relatively inexpensive source of human insulin by inserting DNA encoding the hormone into bacteria (see FIGURE 20.1). Type II diabetes mellitus (non-insulin-dependent diabetes) is characterized either by a deficiency of insulin or, more commonly, by reduced responsiveness in target cells due to some change in insulin receptors. Type II diabetes usually occurs after about age 40, becoming more likely with increasing age. More than 90%  of diabetics are type II, and many can manage their blood glucose solely by exercise and dietary control, although helpful drugs are now available. Both heredity and obesity are major factors in type II diabetes.




