
Chapter 49: SENSORY AND MOTOR MECHANISMS

SENSING, ACTING, AND BRAINS

   The brain's processing of sensory input and motor output is cyclical rather than linear



INTRODUCTION TO SENSORY RECEPTION

   Sensory receptors transduce stimulus energy and transmit signals to the nervous system

   Sensory receptors are categorized by the type of energy they transduce



PHOTORECEPTORS AND VISION

   A diversity of photoreceptors has evolved among invertebrates

   Vertebrates have single-lens eyes

   The light-absorbing pigment rhodopsin triggers a signal-transduction pathway

   The retina assists the cerebral cortex in processing visual information



HEARING AND EQUILIBRIUM

   The mammalian hearing organ is within the inner ear

   The inner ear also contains the organs of equilibrium

   A lateral line system and inner ear detect pressure waves in most fishes and aquatic amphibians

   Many invertebrates have gravity sensors and are sound-sensitive



CHEMORECEPTION--TASTE AND SMELL

   Perceptions of taste and smell are usually interrelated



MOVEMENT AND LOCOMOTION

   Locomotion requires energy to overcome friction and gravity

   Skeletons support and protect the animal body and are essential to movement

   Physical support on land depends on adaptations of body proportions and posture

   Muscles move skeletal parts by contracting

   Interactions between myosin and actin generate force during muscle contractions

   Calcium ions and regulatory proteins control muscle contraction

   Diverse body movements require variation in muscle activity

In the gathering dusk a male moth's antennae detect the chemical attractant of a female moth somewhere upwind. The male takes to the air, following the scent trail toward the female. Suddenly, vibration sensors in the moth's abdomen signal the presence of ultrasonic chirps of a rapidly approaching bat. The bat's sonar enables the mammal to locate moths and other flying insect prey. Reflexively, the moth's nervous system alters the motor output to its wing muscles, sending the insect into an evasive spiral toward the ground. Although it is probably too late for the moth in the photograph on this page, many moths can escape because they can detect a bat's sonar about 30 m away. The bat has to be within 3 m to sense the moth, but since the bat flies faster, it may still have time to detect, home in, and catch its prey.

The outcome of this interaction depends on the abilities of both predator and prey to sense important environmental stimuli and to produce appropriate coordinated movement. Although not all of an animal's moment-by-moment interactions with its environment are as dramatic as such predator-prey struggles, the detection and processing of sensory information and the generation of motor output provide the physiological basis for all animal behavior.

In Chapter 48 we examined how the nervous system transmits and integrates sensory and motor information, finishing with a description of our human brains. We start this chapter with a brief overview of how sensory and motor information is processed in our brains. Then we will examine in a number of different animal groups both the sensory receptors that receive information from the environment and also the structure and function of muscles, the motor effectors that bring about movement in response to that information. We will also study skeletons in the context of body movement.




