
 Helper T lymphocytes function in both humoral and cell-mediated immunity:

an overview

Before we look at the function of helper T lymphocytes, we must return to the MHC and its role in antigen presentation. Recall that class II MHC molecules, the ones recognized by helper T cells, are found only on certain cell types, mainly those that engulf foreign antigens. These antigen-presenting cells (APCs), including macrophages and some B cells, tell the immune system, via helper T cells, that foreign antigen is in the body. For example, a macrophage that has engulfed and broken down a bacterium contains small fragments of bacterial proteins. As a newly made class II MHC molecule moves toward the macrophage surface, it captures one of these bacterial peptides in its antigen-binding groove and carries it to the surface, revealing the foreign peptide to a helper T cell (FIGURE 43.11, p. 910). The interaction between an APC and a helper T cell is greatly enhanced by the presence of a T cell surface protein called CD4. Present on most helper T cells, CD4 binds to part of the class II MHC protein. The interaction between CD4 and a class II MHC molecule helps keep the helper T cell and the APC joined while activation of the TH cell occurs.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 43-11. The central role of helper T cells: a closer look. Helper T cells mobilize both humoral and cell-mediated branches of the immune response. The  indicates stimulation.

When a helper T cell is selected by specific contact with the class II MHC-antigen complex on an APC, the TH cell proliferates and differentiates into a clone of activated helper T cells and memory helper T cells. Activated helper T cells secrete several different cytokines, proteins or peptides that stimulate other lymphocytes. For example, the cytokine interleukin-2 (IL-2) helps B cells that have contacted antigen differentiate into antibody-secreting plasma cells. IL-2 also helps cytotoxic T cells become active killers.

The helper T cell itself is also subject to regulation by cytokines. As a macrophage phagocytoses and presents antigen, the macrophage is stimulated to secrete a cytokine called interleukin-1 (IL-1). IL-1, in combination with the presented antigen, is what activates the helper T cell to produce IL-2 and other cytokines. Also, in an example of positive feedback, IL-2 secreted by the helper T cell stimulates that same cell to proliferate more rapidly and to become an even more active cytokine producer. In these ways, helper T cells modulate both humoral (B cell) and cell-mediated (cytotoxic T cell) immune responses.




