
Chapter 13: MEIOSIS AND SEXUAL LIFE CYCLES

AN INTRODUCTION TO HEREDITY

   Offspring acquire genes from parents by inheriting chromosomes

   Like begets like, more or less: a comparison of asexual and sexual reproduction



THE ROLE OF MEIOSIS IN SEXUAL LIFE CYCLES

   Fertilization and meiosis alternate in sexual life cycles

   Meiosis reduces chromosome number from diploid to haploid: a closer look



ORIGINS OF GENETIC VARIATION

   Sexual life cycles produce genetic variation among offspring

   Evolutionary adaptation depends on a population's genetic variation

Living organisms are distinguished by their ability to reproduce their kind. Like begets like. Only oak trees produce oaks, and only elephants can make more elephants. Furthermore, offspring resemble their parents more than they do less closely related individuals of the same species. The transmission of traits from one generation to the next is called inheritance, or heredity (from the Latin heres, heir). Along with inherited similarity, there is also variation: Offspring differ somewhat in appearance from parents and siblings. These observations have been exploited for the thousands of years that people have bred plants and animals. Curiosity about human similarities and differences is just as ancient. The photo on this page illustrates similarities and differences in Gwyneth Paltrow's family. The mechanisms of heredity and variation, however, eluded biologists until the development of genetics in the twentieth century.

Genetics, the scientific study of heredity and hereditary variation, is the subject of this unit. Here you will learn about genetics at the levels of organism, cell, and molecule. You will find out how geneticists are helping answer age-old questions about life, including the mystery of how multicellular animals and plants arise from a single cell, the fertilized egg. And you will learn that genetic methods and discoveries are catalyzing progress in every other biological field, including physiology, evolutionary biology, ecology, and even behavior. On the practical side, you will learn how modern genetics is revolutionizing medicine and agriculture. Finally, you will consider some social and ethical questions raised by our ability to manipulate DNA, the genetic material. In this chapter, we begin our study of genetics by examining how chromosomes pass from parents to offspring in sexual reproduction.




