
 Genes controlling transcription play key roles in a meristem's change from a vegetative to a floral phase

Another particularly striking passage in plant development is the transition of a vegetative shoot tip into a floral meristem. A combination of environmental cues, such as day length, and internal signals, such as hormones, trigger this transition. (You will learn more about the control of flowering in Chapter 39.) Unlike vegetative growth, which is self-renewing, the production of a flower by an apical meristem terminates primary growth of that shoot tip; the apical meristem is consumed in the production of the flower's organs. The transition from vegetative growth to flowering is associated with the switching on of floral meristem identity genes. The protein products of these genes are transcription factors that in turn help activate the genes required for development of the floral meristem.

Once a shoot meristem is induced to flower, positional information commits each primordium that arises on the flanks of the shoot tip to develop into an organ of specific structure and function--for example, an anther-bearing stamen (see FIGURE 30.13 to review flower structure). Plant biologists have identified some of the genes that are regulated by positional information and that function in this development of floral pattern. Mutations in these organ identity genes substitute one type of floral organ where another would normally form (FIGURE 35.35). For example, a particular mutation may cause an extra whorl of sepals to develop in a flower where there ought to be petals. The inference is that the wild-type alleles for these organ identity genes are responsible for the development of normal floral pattern.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-35. Organ identity genes and pattern formation in flower development. (a) Arabidopsis normally has four whorls of flower parts: sepals (Se), petals (Pe), stamens (St), and carpels (Ca). (b) Researchers have identified several mutations of organ identity genes that cause abnormal flowers to develop. This flower has an extra set of petals in place of stamens and an internal flower where normal plants have carpels.

Organ identity genes code for transcription factors (see FIGURE 21.20). Positional information determines which organ identity genes are expressed in a particular floral-organ primordium. The resulting transcription factors probably induce the expression of those genes responsible for building an organ of specific structure and function. FIGURE 35.36 illustrates a hypothesis for how three regulatory products of organ identity genes are responsible for normal flower development. (Chapter 21 explores this hypothesis for flower development in much greater detail--see FIGURE 21.19.) By constructing such hypotheses and designing experiments to test them, researchers are tracing the genetic basis of plant development.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 35-36. The ABC hypothesis for the functioning of organ identity genes in flower development. Based on their studies of mutations that affect floral morphology in Arabidopsis and other plants (a generalized flower is illustrated here), researchers have determined that three classes of organ identity genes are responsible for the spatial pattern of floral organs. (Chapter 21 presents the experimental support for this hypothesis.) The three classes of organ identity genes are designated A, B, and C in the upper drawing, a schematic diagram of a floral meristem in transverse view. The products of these genes are transcription factors that regulate expression of other genes responsible for the development of the specific floral organs: sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels. Sepals develop from the region of the meristem where only the A genes are active. Petals develop from the region where both A and B genes are expressed. Stamens arise from the meristem where both the B and C genes are active. And carpels are derived from the region where only the C genes are expressed.

In dissecting the plant to examine its parts, as we have done in this chapter, we must remember that the whole plant functions as an integrated organism. In the following chapters, you will learn more about how materials are transported within the plant (Chapter 36), how plants obtain nutrients (Chapter 37), how plants reproduce (Chapter 38), and how the various functions of the plant are coordinated (Chapter 39). Remembering that structure fits function and that plant anatomy and physiology reflect evolutionary adaptation to the problems of living on land will enhance your understanding of plants.




