
 Amniote embryos develop in a fluid-filled sac within a shell or uterus

All vertebrate embryos require an aqueous environment for development. In the case of fish and amphibians, the egg is laid in the surrounding sea or pond and needs no special water-filled enclosure. The movement of vertebrate animals onto land required solving the problem of reproduction in dry environments, and two major solutions evolved: the shelled egg of reptiles and birds and the uterus of placental mammals. Within the shell or uterus, the embryos of birds, reptiles, and mammals are surrounded by fluid within a sac formed by a membrane called the amnion. Vertebrates of these three classes are therefore called amniotes (see Chapter 34). We have already examined the embryonic development of a vertebrate that lacks an amnion, the frog. For comparison, we now study the early development of two amniotes, a bird and a mammal.

Avian Development

After fertilization, a bird egg undergoes meroblastic cleavage in which cell division occurs only in a small region of yolk-free cytoplasm atop the large mass of yolk. The early cleavage divisions produce a cap of cells called the blastodisc, which rests on the undivided yolk. The blastomeres then sort into upper and lower layers, the epiblast and hypoblast (FIGURE 47.12, step 
			  
		). The cavity between these two layers is the avian version of the blastocoel, and this embryonic stage is the avian equivalent of the blastula, although its form is different from the hollow ball of an early frog embryo.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 47-12. Cleavage, gastrulation, and early organogenesis in a chick embryo.

Gastrulation, as in the frog embryo, involves cells moving from the surface of the embryo to an interior location. In birds, however, the route of this cell migration is very different (FIGURE 47.12, step 
			  
		). Some cells of the upper cell layer (epiblast) move toward the midline of the blastodisc, then detach and move inward toward the yolk. The medial movement on the surface and the inward movement of cells at the blastodisc's midline produce a groove called the primitive streak. As the streak lengthens over the surface of the blastodisc, it marks what will become the bird's anterior-posterior axis. The primitive streak is functionally equivalent to the frog blastopore, but it is a linear tuck rather than a ring.

All the cells that will form the embryo come from the epiblast. Some of the epiblast cells that pass through the primitive streak move laterally into the blastocoel, producing the mesoderm. Other epiblast cells, which will produce the endoderm, migrate through the streak and downward, pushing out the cells of the hypoblast. The epiblast cells that remain on the surface give rise to the ectoderm. Although the hypoblast contributes no cells to the embryo, it seems to help direct the formation of the primitive streak before the onset of gastrulation and is required for normal development. The hypoblast cells later segregate from the endoderm and eventually form portions of a sac surrounding the yolk and a stalk connecting the yolk mass to the embryo. After the three germ layers are formed, the borders of the embryonic disc fold downward and come together, pinching the embryo into a three-layered tube joined at midbody to the yolk (FIGURE 47.12, step 
			  
		). Neural tube formation, development of the notochord and somites, and other events in organogenesis occur much as in the frog embryo. FIGURE 47.13 (p. 1010) shows some of the organs in a 2-day-old chick embryo.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 47-13. Organogenesis in a chick embryo. Rudiments of most major organs have already formed in this chick, which is about 56 hours old (LM).

Notice in FIGURE 47.12, step 3, that only part of each germ layer contributes to the embryo itself (which is the protrusion that arises from the blastodisc). The tissue layers that are outside the embryo proper develop into four extraembryonic membranes that support further embryonic development within the egg. These four "membranes," each a sheet of cells, are the yolk sac, the amnion, the chorion, and the allantois. The diagram in FIGURE 47.14 shows these membranes for a developing chick, and the legend describes the functions of each membrane.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 47-14. The development of extraembryonic membranes in a chick. The four major membranes (labeled in bold type) provide support services for the embryo. Each is a sheet of cells that develops from epithelial sheets external to the embryo proper. The yolk sac expands over the surface of the yolk mass. Cells of the yolk sac will digest yolk, and blood vessels that develop within the membrane will carry nutrients into the embryo. Lateral folds of extraembryonic tissue extend over the top of the embryo and fuse to form two more membranes, the amnion and the chorion, which are separated by an extraembryonic extension of the coelom. The amnion encloses the embryo in a fluid-filled amniotic sac, protecting the embryo from drying out, and it, along with the chorion, cushions the embryo against mechanical shocks. The fourth membrane, the allantois, originates as an outpocketing of the embryo's hindgut. The allantois is a sac that extends into the extraembryonic coelom. It functions as a disposal sac for uric acid, the insoluble nitrogenous waste of the embryo. As the allantois expands, it presses the chorion against the vitelline membrane, the inner lining of the eggshell. Together, the allantois and chorion form a respiratory organ for the embryo. Blood vessels that form in the epithelium of the allantois transport oxygen to the embryo. The extraembryonic membranes of reptiles and birds are adaptations associated with the special problems of development on land.

Mammalian Development

In most mammalian species, fertilization takes place in the oviduct, and the earliest stages of development occur while the embryo completes its journey down the oviduct to the uterus (see Chapter 46). In contrast to the large, yolky eggs of birds and reptiles, the egg of a placental mammal is quite small, storing little in the way of food reserves. As already mentioned, the mammalian egg and zygote do not exhibit any obvious polarity with respect to the contents of the cytoplasm, and cleavage of the yolk-lacking zygote is holoblastic. However, mammalian gastrulation and early organogenesis follow a pattern similar to that of birds and reptiles. (Recall from Chapter 34 that mammals descended from reptilian stock during the early Mesozoic era.)

Cleavage is relatively slow in mammals. In the case of humans, the first division is complete about 36 hours after fertilization, the second division at about 60 hours, and the third division at about 72 hours. The blastomeres are equal in size. An important event during early mammalian development is the process of compaction, which occurs at the eight-cell stage. Before compaction, the cells of the early embryo are loosely packed; after compaction the cells tightly adhere to one another. Compaction involves the production of new proteins on the surface of the cells, including proteins called cadherins (discussed later in the chapter).

Further development of the human embryo is shown in FIGURE 47.15. 
			  
		 By about 7 days after fertilization, the embryo has over 100 cells arranged around a central cavity. This is the embryonic stage known as the blastocyst. Protruding into one end of the blastocyst cavity is a cluster of cells called the inner cell mass, which will subsequently develop into the embryo proper and some of the extraembryonic membranes. The outer epithelium surrounding the cavity is the trophoblast, which, along with mesodermal tissue, will form the fetal portion of the placenta. The embryo reaches the uterus by the blastocyst stage and soon begins to implant in the uterine lining (endometrium).


			  
		 The trophoblast initiates implantation by secreting enzymes that enable the blastocyst to penetrate the endometrium. Bathed in blood spilled from eroded capillaries in the endometrium, the trophoblast thickens and extends fingerlike projections into the surrounding maternal tissue. (The placenta will later form from this proliferated trophoblast and the region of endometrium it invades; see FIGURE 46.17.) Around the time of implantation, the inner cell mass of the blastocyst forms a flat disc with an upper layer of cells, the epiblast, and a lower layer, the hypoblast. These layers are homologous to those of birds, and, as in birds, the embryo will develop almost entirely from epiblast cells, while the hypoblast cells will form the yolk sac.


			  
		Now the extraembryonic membranes begin to develop. The trophoblast is giving rise to the chorion and continues to expand into the endometrium. The epiblast has begun to form the amnion, surrounding a fluid-filled cavity. Mesodermal cells that will become part of the placenta are also derived from the epiblast.


			  
		Gastrulation occurs by the inward movement of cells from the epiblast through a primitive streak to form mesoderm and endoderm, just as it does in the chick. We now have a three-layered embryo surrounded by proliferating extraembryonic mesoderm. Four extraembryonic membranes have formed, which are homologous to those of reptiles and birds. The chorion, which develops from the trophoblast, completely surrounds the embryo and the other extraembryonic membranes. The amnion begins as a dome above the proliferating epiblast and will eventually enclose the embryo in a fluid-filled amniotic cavity. (The fluid from this cavity is the "water" expelled from the vagina of the mother when the amnion breaks just prior to childbirth.) Below the developing embryo proper, the yolk sac encloses another fluid-filled cavity. Although this cavity contains no yolk, the membrane that surrounds it is given the same name as the homologous membrane in birds and reptiles. The yolk sac membrane of mammals is a site of early formation of blood cells, which later migrate into the embryo proper. The fourth extraembryonic membrane, the allantois, develops as an outpocketing of the embryo's rudimentary gut, as it does in the chick. The allantois is incorporated into the umbilical cord, where it forms blood vessels that transport oxygen and nutrients from the placenta to the embryo and rid the embryo of carbon dioxide and nitrogenous wastes. Thus, the extraembryonic membranes of shelled eggs, where embryos are nourished with yolk, were conserved as mammals diverged from reptiles in the course of evolution, but with modifications adapted to development within the reproductive tract of the mother.

Organogenesis begins with the formation of the neural tube, notochord, and somites. By the end of the first trimester of human development, rudiments of all the major organs have developed from the three germ layers, as was summarized in TABLE 47.1.




