
 Pressure flow is the mechanism of translocation in angiosperms

Phloem sap flows from source to sink at rates as great as 1 m/hr, which is much too fast to be accounted for by either diffusion or cytoplasmic streaming. Phloem sap moves by bulk flow, which is driven by pressure (thus the synonym pressure flow). Phloem loading results in a high solute concentration at the source end of a sieve tube, which lowers the water potential and causes water to flow into the tube (FIGURE 36.17, p. 764). Hydrostatic pressure develops within the sieve tube, and the pressure is greatest at the source end of the tube. At the sink end, the pressure is relieved by the loss of water, owing to water potential being lowered outside the sieve tube by the exodus of sucrose. The building of pressure at one end of the tube (source) and reduction of that pressure at the opposite end (sink) cause water to flow from source to sink, carrying the sugar along. Water is recycled back from sink to source by xylem vessels.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 36-17. Pressure flow in a sieve tube. In this example, the source is a leaf and the sink is a root.

The pressure flow model explains why phloem sap always flows from a sugar source to a sugar sink, regardless of their locations in the plant. Researchers have devised several kinds of experiments to test the model. FIGURE 36.18 illustrates an innovative experiment that takes advantage of natural phloem probes: aphids that feed on phloem sap. The case for pressure flow as the mechanism of translocation in angiosperms is convincing. It is not yet known, however, if this model applies to other vascular plants.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 36-18. Tapping phloem sap with the help of an aphid. (a) The "honey-dew" droplet exuded from the anus of this aphid consists of phloem sap minus some nutrients absorbed by the insect. (b) The aphid inserts a modified mouthpart called a stylet into the plant and probes until the tip of this hypodermic-like organ penetrates a single sieve-tube member (LM). The pressure within the sieve tube force-feeds the aphid, swelling it to several times its original size. (c) While the aphid is feeding, it can be anesthetized and severed from its stylet, which then serves the researcher as a miniature tap that exudes phloem sap for hours. The closer the stylet is to a sugar source, the faster the sap will flow out and the greater its sugar concentration. These results are predicted by the pressure flow hypothesis.

In our study of how sugar moves in plants, we have seen examples of plant transport on three levels: at the cellular level of transport across plasma membranes (sucrose accumulation by active transport in phloem cells); at the short-distance level of lateral transport within organs (sucrose migration from mesophyll to phloem via the symplast and apoplast); and at the long-distance level of transport between organs (bulk flow within sieve tubes). An increased understanding of these transport processes will be central to agricultural advancement in the future. Consider the fact that it is not photosynthesis that limits yield in a plant growing under ideal conditions, but the ability of the plant to transport sugar away from the leaf. Thus, the genetic engineering of higher-yielding crop plants may depend on gaining a better understanding of the factors that limit the bulk flow of sugars through the phloem.

Plant physiologists still have much to learn about the mechanisms of transport in the vascular systems of xylem and phloem. William Harvey, the great 17th-century physiologist, speculated that plants and animals have similar circulatory systems. The idea was abandoned after careful dissection failed to turn up a heart in plants. We are only now beginning to understand how a plant keeps sap flowing through its veins without the help of moving parts.




