
 Debate about the origin of life abounds

Laboratory simulations cannot prove that the kind of chemical evolution that has been described here actually created life on the primitive Earth, but only that some of the key steps could have happened. The origin of life remains a matter of speculation, and there are alternative views of how several key processes occurred.

Some researchers question whether abiotic synthesis of organic monomers on Earth was necessary as a first step in the origin of life. As we discussed earlier, it is possible that at least some organic compounds reached the early Earth from space on meteorites and comets.

Where life began is another issue. Until recently, most researchers favored shallow water or moist sediments as the most likely sites for life's origin. Some scientists now question this view, arguing that Earth's surface was very inhospitable during the period when life probably began. Perhaps life began on the less exposed seafloor. The discovery of deep-sea vents in the late 1970s raised the possibility that earlier vents supplied the energy and chemical precursors for the origin of protobionts (FIGURE 26.14). Molecular phylogenetic analyses indicate that the ancestors of modern prokaryotes thrived in very hot conditions and may have lived on inorganic sulfur compounds that are common in deep-sea vent environments. Laboratory studies by G&uuml;nter Wachtershuser and colleagues also point to the environments of deep-sea vents and volcanoes as abiotic sources of some of the organic compounds, such as acetyl coenzyme A, that cells use in energy metabolism (see FIGURE 9.11). Sulfides of iron and nickel, common in volcanic and deep-sea vent areas, catalyze the formation of acetic acid and precursors of acetyl coenzyme from CO and H2S. Wachtershuser considers it likely that life arose in an environment where these reactions were common and then adopted them as the earliest form of metabolism.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 26-14. A window to early life? In this porthole view from the deep-sea research submarine Alvin, you can see a water-testing wand mounted to a robotic arm. This 2000 expedition to the Sea of Cort&eacute;s sampled the environments around deep-sea hydrothermal vents at depths of greater than a mile. The column of hot effluent seen rising from this vent included hydrogen sulfide and iron sulfide, which react to produce pyrite (fool's gold) and H2 gas. Prokaryotes that live around the vents use the H2 as an energy source. Although we may consider such environments extreme by modern-Earth criteria, many researchers favor the hypothesis that life began in such places.

On a broader scale, the hypothesis that life is not restricted to Earth is becoming more accessible to scientific testing. Photographs taken by the Galileo spacecraft of the ice-covered surface of Europa, one of Jupiter's moons, have led to hypotheses that liquid water lies beneath the surface and may support prokaryotic life. The surface of Mars is a cold, dry, lifeless desert, but billions of years ago it was probably relatively warm and may have held liquid water and had a CO2-rich atmosphere. It is possible that prebiotic chemistry, similar to that on early Earth, also occurred on Mars before the planet became less hospitable. Scientists anticipate that exploration in the next decade will provide clues about whether microbial life on Mars once existed. Did life evolve there and then die out, or was prebiotic chemistry snuffed out by planetary changes before any life forms developed? Many scientists also see Mars as an ideal place to test hypotheses about Earth's prebiotic chemistry.

Debate about the origin of terrestrial and extraterrestrial life abounds, and we have sampled only a few of the issues. Whatever took place in the prebiotic world, the leap from an aggregate of molecules that reproduces to even the simplest prokaryotic cell is immense, and change must have occurred in many smaller evolutionary steps. The point at which we stop calling membrane-enclosed compartments that metabolize and replicate their genetic programs protobionts and begin calling them living cells is as fuzzy as our definitions of life. We do know that prokaryotes were already flourishing at least 3.5 billion years ago and that all the lineages of life arose from those ancient prokaryotes.




