
 Fertilization and meiosis alternate in sexual life cycles

We begin with a familiar example--the human life cycle--and use it to introduce some basic terms.

The Human Life Cycle

In humans, each somatic cell--any cell other than a sperm or ovum--has 46 chromosomes. With a light microscope, condensed (mitotic) chromosomes can be distinguished from one another by their appearance. The sizes of chromosomes and the positions of their centromeres differ. When chromosomes are stained with certain dyes, each chromosome also has a distinctive pattern of colored bands.

Careful examination of a micrograph of the 46 human chromosomes reveals that there are two of each type. This becomes clear when images of the chromosomes are arranged in pairs, starting with the longest chromosomes. The resulting display is called a karyotype (FIGURE 13.3). The chromosomes that make up a pair--that have the same length, centromere position, and staining pattern--are called homologous chromosomes, or homologues. The two chromosomes of each pair carry genes controlling the same inherited characters. For example, if a gene for eye color is situated at a particular locus on a certain chromosome, then the homologue of that chromosome will also have a gene specifying eye color at the equivalent locus.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 13-3. Preparation of a human karyotype. Karyotypes, ordered displays of an individual's chromosomes, are often prepared using lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. The cells are treated with a drug to stimulate mitosis and are then grown in culture for several days. Another drug is then added to arrest mitosis at metaphase, when the chromosomes, each consisting of two joined sister chromatids, are highly condensed and easy to identify in the microscope. The figure above outlines the further steps in the preparation of the karyotype. Karyotyping can be used to screen for abnormal numbers of chromosomes or defective chromosomes associated with certain congenital disorders, such as Down syndrome. (The causes and effects of chromosomal disorders are discussed in Chapter 15.)

There is an important exception to the rule of homologous chromosomes for human somatic cells: the two distinct chromosomes referred to as X and Y. Human females have a homologous pair of X chromosomes (XX), but males have one X and one Y chromosome (XY). Only small parts of the X and Y are homologous; most of the genes carried on the X chromosome do not have counterparts on the tiny Y, and the Y has genes lacking on the X. Because they determine an individual's sex, the X and Y chromosomes are called sex chromosomes. The other chromosomes are called autosomes.

The occurrence of homologous pairs of chromosomes in our karyotype is a consequence of our sexual origins. We inherit one chromosome of each pair from each parent. So the 46 chromosomes in our somatic cells are actually two sets of 23 chromosomes--a maternal set (from our mother) and a paternal set (from our father).

Sperm cells and ova are different from somatic cells in chromosome count. Each of these reproductive cells, or gametes, has a single set of the 22 autosomes plus a single sex chromosome, either X or Y. A cell with a single chromosome set is called a haploid cell. For humans, the haploid number, abbreviated n, is 23 (n = 23).

By means of sexual intercourse, a haploid sperm cell from the father reaches and fuses with a haploid ovum of the mother. This union of gametes is called fertilization, or syngamy. The resulting fertilized egg, or zygote, contains the two haploid sets of chromosomes bearing genes representing the maternal and paternal family lines. The zygote and all other cells having two sets of chromosomes are called diploid cells. For humans, the diploid number of chromosomes, abbreviated 2n, is 46 (2n = 46).

As a human develops from a zygote to a sexually mature adult, the zygote's genes are passed on with precision to all somatic cells of the body by the process of mitosis. Thus, somatic cells, like the zygote from which they are derived, are diploid.

The only cells of the human body not produced by mitosis are the gametes, which develop in the gonads (ovaries in females and testes in males). Imagine what would happen if human gametes were made by mitosis: They would be diploid like the somatic cells. At the next round of fertilization, when two gametes fused, the normal chromosome number of 46 would double to 92, and each subsequent generation would double the number of chromosomes yet again. But sexually reproducing organisms carry out a process that halves the chromosome number in the gametes, compensating for the doubling that occurs at fertilization. This process is a form of cell division called meiosis, and in animals it occurs only in the ovaries or testes. While mitosis conserves chromosome number, meiosis reduces the chromosome number by half. As a result, human sperm and ova each have a haploid set of 23 different chromosomes, one from each homologous pair. Fertilization restores the diploid condition by combining two haploid sets of chromosomes, and the human life cycle is repeated, generation after generation (FIGURE 13.4).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 13-4. The human life cycle. In each generation, the doubling of chromosome number that results from fertilization is offset by the halving of chromosome number that results from meiosis. For humans, the number of chromosomes in a haploid cell is 23 (n = 23); the number of chromosomes in the diploid zygote and all somatic cells arising from it is 46 (2n = 46).

In general outline, the human life cycle is typical of many animals. Indeed, the processes of fertilization and meiosis are the unique trademarks of sexual reproduction. Fertilization and meiosis alternate in sexual life cycles, offsetting each other's effects on the chromosome number and thus perpetuating a species' chromosome count.

The Variety of Sexual Life Cycles

Although the alternation of meiosis and fertilization is common to all organisms that reproduce sexually, the timing of these two events in the life cycle varies, depending on the species. These variations can be grouped into three main types of life cycles (FIGURE 13.5). The human life cycle is an example of one type, characteristic of most animals. Gametes are the only haploid cells. Meiosis occurs during the production of gametes, which undergo no further cell division prior to fertilization. The diploid zygote divides by mitosis, producing a multicellular organism that is diploid (FIGURE 13.5a).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 13-5. Three sexual life cycles differing in the timing of meiosis and fertilization (syngamy). The common feature of all three cycles is the alternation of these two key events, which contribute to genetic variation among offspring.

A second type of life cycle occurs in most fungi and some protists, including some algae. After gametes fuse to form a diploid zygote, meiosis occurs before offspring develop. This meiosis produces not gametes but haploid cells that then divide by mitosis to give rise to a haploid multicellular adult organism. Subsequently, the haploid organism produces gametes by mitosis, rather than by meiosis. The only diploid stage is the zygote (FIGURE 13.5b). (Note that either haploid or diploid cells can divide by mitosis, depending on the type of life cycle. Only diploid cells, however, can undergo meiosis.)

Plants and some species of algae exhibit a third type of life cycle called alternation of generations. This type of life cycle includes both diploid and haploid multicellular stages. The multicellular diploid stage is called the sporophyte. Meiosis in the sporophyte produces haploid cells called spores. Unlike a gamete, a spore gives rise to a multicellular individual without fusing with another cell. A spore divides mitotically to generate a multicellular haploid stage called the gametophyte. The haploid gametophyte makes gametes by mitosis. Fertilization results in a diploid zygote, which develops into the next sporophyte generation. In this type of life cycle, therefore, the sporophyte and gametophyte generations take turns reproducing each other (FIGURE 13.5c).

Though the three types of sexual life cycles differ in the timing of meiosis and fertilization, they share a fundamental result: Each cycle of chromosome halving and doubling contributes to genetic variation among offspring. A closer look at meiosis will reveal the sources of this variation.




