
 Restoring degraded areas is an increasingly important conservation effort

Eventually, some areas that are altered by human activity are abandoned. For instance, the soils of many tropical areas become unproductive and are abandoned less than five years after being cleared for farming. Mining activities may last for several decades, but the lands are then abandoned in a degraded state. Many ecosystems are also damaged inadvertently by the dumping of toxic chemicals or such mishaps as oil spills. These degraded habitats and ecosystems are increasing in area because the natural rates of recovery by successional processes are slower than the rate of degradation by human activities.

A new subdiscipline of conservation biology called restoration ecology applies ecological principles in an effort to return degraded ecosystems to conditions as similar as possible to their natural, predegraded state. Restoration ecology seeks to reverse population and community declines. One basic assumption of restoration ecology is that most environmental damage is reversible. This optimism must be balanced by a second basic assumption--that communities are not infinitely resilient to damage.

Biological communities can recover naturally from many types of disturbances through a series of restoration mechanisms that occur during the various stages of ecological succession (see Chapter 53). The amount of time required for such natural recovery is more closely related to the spatial scale of the disturbance than the type of disturbance: The larger the area disturbed, the longer the time frame for recovery. Whether the disturbance is natural or caused by humans seems to make little difference in this size-time relationship (FIGURE 55.21). One of the goals of restoration ecology is to identify the processes that most limit the speed of recovery so that those factors can be manipulated to reduce the time it takes for a community to bounce back from the impact of disturbances. Thus, understanding the specific characteristics of succession after each type of disturbance and for each type of ecosystem provides essential background for restoration ecologists.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 55-21. The size-time relationship for community recovery from natural (salmon-colored ellipses) and human-caused (white rectangles) disasters. Note that the scales are logarithmic. The aim of restoration ecology is to reduce the recovery time by manipulating ecological factors that slow recovery.

Two key strategies in restoration ecology are bioremediation and augmentation of ecosystem processes. Bioremediation is the use of living organisms, usually prokaryotes, fungi, or plants, to detoxify polluted ecosystems (see Chapter 27). Some plants adapted to soils with heavy metals are capable of accumulating high concentrations of potentially toxic metals such as zinc, nickel, lead, and cadmium. Restoration ecologists can use these plants to revegetate sites degraded by mining and other human activities and then harvest the plants to recover the particular metals. A number of researchers are also focusing on the ability of certain prokaryotes and lichens to concentrate metals. Researchers in the United Kingdom recently discovered a lichen species that grows on soil polluted with uranium dust left over from mining. Useful as a biological monitor of uranium and potentially as a remediator, the lichen concentrates uranium in a dark pigment similar to melanin in human skin. And several extremeophilic bacteria and archaea thrive in natural environments similar to industrially polluted sites. Restoration ecologists have achieved some success in using the bacterium Pseudomonas, supplied with growth stimulants, to clean up oil spills on beaches. More common still is the use of certain prokaryotes to metabolize toxins in dump sites. Genetic engineering may become increasingly important as a tool for improving the performance of certain species as bioremediators.

In contrast to bioremediation, which is a strategy for removing harmful substances, biogiocal augmentation uses organisms to add essential materials to a degraded ecosystem. Augmenting ecosystem processes requires determining what factors, such as chemical nutrients, have been removed from an area and are limiting its rate of recovery. Encouraging the growth of plants that thrive in nutrient-poor soils often speeds up the rate of successional changes that can lead to recovery of damaged sites. Ariel Lugo, director of the U.S. Forest Service's Institute of Tropical Forestry in Puerto Rico, has evidence of a positive effect of an introduced plant species on the recovery of native vegetation (FIGURE 55.22). Thriving on nitrogen-poor soils, the leguminous plant Albizzia procera, exotic in Puerto Rico, helps set the stage for recolonization by native tropical forest species.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 55-22. Restoration of degraded roadsides in the tropics. Forest ecologist Ariel Lugo has monitored rapid regrowth of indigenous communities along roadsides in Puerto Rico. An exotic plant, Albizzia procera (shown here), which thrives on nitrogen-poor soils, first colonized these sites after the original forest was removed and soils were depleted of nutrients. Apparently, the rapid buildup of organic material from dense stands of Albizzia enabled indigenous plants to recolonize the area and overgrow the exotic plant in a relatively brief time.

To date, the most extensive and successful restoration projects have been in marginally disturbed wetlands in landscapes where biodiversity has not been greatly depleted. In these projects, restoring the natural water flow patterns and replanting indigenous vegetation have led to recolonization by animal populations. Restoring viable populations of highly sensitive wetland species to heavily degraded wetlands is much more challenging, as are similar restoration efforts in most ecosystems.

Because of the novelty of restoration science, the complexity of ecosystems, and the unique features of each situation, restoration ecologists usually must learn as they go. Many restoration ecologists advocate adaptive management, which is the use of the experimental method in trying several promising types of management to find out what works best. The key to adaptive management and the key to restoration ecology is to consider alternative ways of accomplishing goals and to learn from mistakes. The long-term objective of restoration is to speed the reestablishment of the predisturbance ecosystem. But a pragmatic initial goal is often to approximate the original ecosystem, which can be accomplished much sooner than complete restoration to the original state.




