
 The interactions between organisms and their environments determine the distribution and abundance of organisms

Ecologists use observations and manipulative experiments to test hypotheses aimed at such questions as, Why don't sequoia trees grow in Colorado? Why are there no malaria-carrying mosquitoes in Minnesota? Why are there so many deer in Ohio? What caused the extinction of the passenger pigeon?

FIGURE 50.1 shows the geographic range of the red kangaroo in Australia and graphically illustrates the basis for two major questions ecologists try to answer. What factors limit the geographic range, or distribution, of a species? And what factors determine its abundance? Given a hypothesis, or suggested explanation, for one of these questions, ecologists make predictions of what should be observed in nature or what the outcome of an experiment should be. In some cases, they can devise mathematical models that enable them to simulate the possible results of large-scale experiments that are impossible to conduct in the field. In this approach, important variables and their hypothetical relationships are described through mathematical equations. The potential ways in which the variables interact can then be studied. For example, many ecologists and climatologists use sophisticated computer programs to develop models that predict the effects that human activities will have on climate and how the resulting climatic changes will affect geographic distributions of life-forms during the next century. Of course, such simulations are only as good as the basic information on which the models are based, and obtaining that information requires extensive laboratory work and fieldwork.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 50-1. Distribution and abundance of the red kangaroo in Australia, based on aerial surveys. This kangaroo species occurs throughout arid regions of the continent.

The environment of any organism includes abiotic components (nonliving chemical and physical factors), such as temperature, light, water, and nutrients, and biotic (living) components--all the organisms that are part of any individual's environment. Other organisms may compete with an individual for food and resources, prey upon it, or change its physical and chemical environment. As we will see, questions about the relative importance of various environmental components are frequently at the heart of ecological studies--and some accompanying controversies.




