
 Four anatomical features characterize the phylum Chordata

Although chordates vary widely in appearance, they are distinguished as a phylum by the presence of four anatomical structures that appear at some point during the animal's lifetime, often only during embryonic development. These four chordate characteristics are a notochord; a dorsal, hollow nerve cord; pharyngeal slits; and a muscular, postanal tail (FIGURE 34.2, p. 680).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-2. Chordate characteristics. All chordates possess the four trademarks of the phylum: a notochord; a dorsal, hollow nerve cord; pharyngeal slits; and a muscular, postanal tail.

1. Notochord

Chordates are named for a skeletal structure, the notochord, present in all chordate embryos. The notochord is a longitudinal, flexible rod located between the digestive tube and the nerve cord. Composed of large, fluid-filled cells encased in fairly stiff, fibrous tissue, it provides skeletal support throughout most of the length of the animal. The notochord persists in the adult of some invertebrate chordates and primitive vertebrates. However, in most vertebrates a more complex, jointed skeleton develops, and the adult retains only remnants of the embryonic notochord--as gelatinous material of the disks between the vertebrae of humans, for example.

2. Dorsal, Hollow Nerve Cord

The nerve cord of a chordate embryo develops from a plate of ectoderm that rolls into a tube located dorsal to the notochord. The result is a dorsal, hollow nerve cord unique to chordates. Other animal phyla have solid nerve cords, usually ventrally located. The nerve cord of a chordate embryo develops into the central nervous system: the brain and spinal cord.

3. Pharyngeal Slits

The digestive tube of chordates extends from the mouth to the anus. The region just posterior to the mouth is the pharynx, which opens to the outside of the animal through several pairs of slits. These pharyngeal slits allow water that enters the mouth to exit without continuing through the entire digestive tract. The pharyngeal slits function as suspension-feeding devices in many invertebrate chordates. The slits and structures supporting them have become modified for gas exchange (in aquatic vertebrates), jaw support, hearing, and other functions during vertebrate evolution.

4. Muscular, Postanal Tail

Most chordates have a tail extending posterior to the anus. By contrast, most nonchordates have a digestive tract that extends nearly the whole length of the body. The chordate tail contains skeletal elements and muscles and provides much of the propulsive force in many aquatic species.




