
 Behavior has both proximate and ultimate causes

When we observe a certain behavior, we are apt to ask both proximate and ultimate questions. In the study of animal behavior, proximate questions are mechanistic, concerned with the environmental stimuli, if any, that trigger a behavior, as well as the genetic and physiological mechanisms underlying a behavioral act. Ultimate questions address the evolutionary significance of a behavior. To emphasize the distinction (and also the connection) between proximate and ultimate causation, consider the observation that the magnolia warbler, like many animals, breeds in spring and early summer. In terms of proximate causation, a reasonable hypothesis is that breeding is triggered by the effect of increased day length on an animal's photoreceptors. Many animals can be stimulated to begin breeding by experimentally lengthening their daily exposure to light. This stimulus results in neural and hormonal changes that induce behavior associated with reproduction, such as singing and nest building in birds.

In contrast to proximate questions, ultimate questions take such forms as, Why did natural selection favor this behavior and not a different one? Hypotheses addressing "why" questions propose that the behavior maximizes fitness in some particular way. A reasonable hypothesis for why many animals reproduce in spring and early summer is that this is when breeding is most productive or adaptive. For warblers and many other birds, an abundant supply of insects in the spring provides ample food for rapidly growing offspring. Individuals that attempt to breed at other times would be at a selective disadvantage. Increased day length itself has little adaptive significance, but since it is the most reliable indicator of time of year, there has been selection for a proximate mechanism that depends on increased day length. In brief, proximate mechanisms produce behaviors that ultimately evolved because they reflect Darwinian fitness in some particular way. Behavioral biologists also use the comparative methods of phylogenetic biology (see Chapter 25) to formulate hypotheses about the evolution of behavior. Phylogenetic trees based on molecular, morphological, or behavioral data and illustrating the most likely evolutionary history of a closely related group of species enable researchers to estimate when a particular behavior arose in a lineage, whether it arose once or repeatedly, and which kinds of behavior occurred in ancestors.




