
 Chemical reactions make and break chemical bonds

The making and breaking of chemical bonds, leading to changes in the composition of matter, are called chemical reactions. An example is the reaction between hydrogen and oxygen to form water:





This reaction breaks the covalent bonds of H2 and O2 and forms the new bonds of H2O. When we write a chemical reaction, we use an arrow to indicate the conversion of the starting materials, called reactants, to the products. The coefficients indicate the number of molecules involved; for example, the 2 in front of the H2 means that the reaction starts with two molecules of hydrogen. Notice that all atoms of the reactants must be accounted for in the products. Matter is conserved in a chemical reaction: Reactions cannot create or destroy matter but can only rearrange it.

Photosynthesis, which takes place within the cells of green plant tissues, is a particularly important example of chemical reactions rearranging matter. Humans and other animals ultimately depend on photosynthesis for food and oxygen, and this process is at the foundation of almost all ecosystems. Following is the chemical shorthand that summarizes the process of photosynthesis:


The raw materials of photosynthesis are carbon dioxide (CO2), which is taken from the air, and water (H2O), which is absorbed from the soil. Within the plant cells, sunlight powers the conversion of these ingredients to a sugar called glucose (C6H12O6) and oxygen molecules (O2), a by-product that the plant releases into the surroundings (FIGURE 2.20). Although photosynthesis is actually a sequence of many chemical reactions, we still end up with the same number and kinds of atoms we had when we started. Matter has simply been rearranged.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 2-20. Photosynthesis: a solar-powered rearrangement of matter. This Elodea, a freshwater plant, produces sugar by rearranging the atoms of carbon dioxide and water in the chemical process known as photosynthesis. Sunlight powers this chemical transformation. Much of the sugar is then converted to other food molecules. Oxygen gas (O2) is a by-product of photosynthesis; notice the bubbles of oxygen escaping from the leaves in the photo.

Some chemical reactions go to completion; that is, all the reactants are converted to products. But most reactions are reversible, the products of the forward reaction becoming the reactants for the reverse reaction. For example, hydrogen and nitrogen molecules can combine to form ammonia, but ammonia can also decompose to regenerate hydrogen and nitrogen:

The opposite-headed arrows indicate that the reaction is reversible.

One of the factors affecting the rate of a reaction is the concentration of reactants. The greater the concentration of reactant molecules, the more frequently they collide with one another and have an opportunity to react to form products. The same holds true for the products. As products accumulate, collisions resulting in the reverse reaction become increasingly frequent. Eventually, the forward and reverse reactions occur at the same rate, and the relative concentrations of products and reactants stop changing. The point at which the reactions offset one another exactly is called chemical equilibrium. This is a dynamic equilibrium; reactions are still going on, but with no net effect on the concentrations of reactants and products. Equilibrium does not mean that the reactants and products are equal in concentration, but only that their concentrations have stabilized. The reaction involving ammonia reaches equilibrium when ammonia decomposes as rapidly as it forms. In this case, there is far more ammonia than hydrogen and nitrogen at equilibrium.

We will return to the subject of chemical reactions after more detailed study of the various types of molecules that are important to life. In the next chapter, we focus on water, the substance in which all the chemical processes of living organisms occur.




