
 Abnormal immune function can lead to disease

The highly regulated interplay of lymphocytes with foreign substances, with each other, and with other body cells provides us with extraordinary protection from many diseases. However, if this delicate balance is disrupted by an immune system malfunction, the effects on the individual can range from the minor inconvenience of some allergies to the serious and often fatal consequences of certain autoimmune and immunodeficiency diseases.

Allergies

Allergies are hypersensitive (exaggerated) responses to certain environmental antigens, called allergens. One hypothesis to explain the origin of allergies is that they are evolutionary remnants of the immune system's response to parasitic worms. The humoral mechanism that combats worms is similar to the allergic response that causes such disorders as hay fever and allergic asthma.

The most common allergies involve antibodies of the IgE class (see TABLE 43.1). Hay fever, for example, occurs when plasma cells secrete IgE specific for pollen allergens. Some of the IgE antibodies attach by their tails to mast cells present in connective tissues, without binding to the pollen. Later, when pollen grains enter the body, they attach to the antigen-binding sites of mast cell-associated IgE, cross-linking adjacent antibody molecules. This event induces the mast cell to degranulate--that is, to release histamine and other inflammatory agents from vesicles called granules (FIGURE 43.18, p. 918). Recall that histamine causes dilation and increased permeability of small blood vessels. These inflammatory events lead to typical allergy symptoms: sneezing, runny nose, tearing eyes, and smooth muscle contractions that can result in breathing difficulty. Antihistamines diminish allergy symptoms by blocking receptors for histamine.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 43-18. Mast cells, IgE, and the allergic response.

Sometimes, an acute allergic response can result in anaphylactic shock, a life-threatening reaction to injected or ingested allergens. Anaphylactic shock occurs when widespread mast cell degranulation triggers abrupt dilation of peripheral blood vessels, causing a precipitous drop in blood pressure. Death may occur within a few minutes. Allergic responses to bee venom or penicillin can lead to anaphylactic shock in people who are extremely allergic to these substances. Likewise, people very allergic to peanuts, fish, or other foods have died from eating only tiny amounts of these allergens. Some individuals with severe hypersensitivities carry syringes containing the hormone epinephrine, which counteracts this allergic response.

Autoimmune Diseases

Sometimes the immune system loses tolerance for self and turns against certain molecules of the body, causing one of the many autoimmune diseases. In systemic lupus erythematosus (lupus), for example, the immune system generates antibodies (known as autoantibodies) against all sorts of self molecules, even histones and DNA released by the normal breakdown of body cells. Lupus is characterized by skin rashes, fever, arthritis, and kidney dysfunction. Another antibody-mediated autoimmune disease, rheumatoid arthritis, leads to damage and painful inflammation of the cartilage and bone of joints. In insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, the insulin-producing beta cells of the pancreas are the targets of autoimmune cell-mediated responses. A final example is multiple sclerosis (MS), the most common chronic neurological disease in developed countries. In MS, T cells reactive against myelin infiltrate the central nervous system and destroy the myelin of neurons (see FIGURE 48.2). People with MS experience a number of serious neurological abnormalities.

The mechanisms that lead to autoimmunity are not fully understood. For a long time, it was thought that people with autoimmune diseases differed from healthy people in having self-reactive lymphocytes that happened to escape elimination during their development. We now know that healthy people also have lymphocytes with the capacity to react against self. However, these cells are prevented from inducing autoimmune reactions by a number of regulatory mechanisms. So, autoimmune disease likely arises from some failure in immune regulation. One intriguing finding is that the inheritance of particular MHC alleles is associated with susceptibility to certain autoimmune diseases, such as insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.

Immunodeficiency Diseases

There are almost as many immunodeficiency diseases as there are components of the immune system. Many inborn deficiencies affect the function of either humoral or cell-mediated immune defenses. In severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID), both branches of the immune system fail to function. For people with this genetic disease, long-term survival usually requires a bone marrow transplant that will continue to supply functional lymphocytes. For one type of SCID, caused by deficiency of the enzyme adenosine deaminase (ADA), medical scientists have been working to develop a gene therapy in which the individual's own cells are removed, provided with a functional ADA gene, and returned to the body. This treatment would eliminate the danger of graft versus host disease. However, the results to date are equivocal because the patients are also being given additional supplies of the enzyme. Gene therapy for several patients suffering from another type of SCID has also had equivocal results.

Immunodeficiency is not always an inborn condition; an individual may develop immune dysfunction later in life. For example, certain cancers suppress the immune system, especially Hodgkin's disease, which damages the lymphatic system. Another well-known and devastating acquired immune deficiency is AIDS, described in the next section.

Healthy immune function appears to depend on both the endocrine system and the nervous systems. Nearly 2,000 years ago the Greek physician Galen recorded that people suffering from depression were more likely than others to develop cancer. In fact, there is growing evidence that physical and emotional stress can harm immunity. Hormones secreted by the adrenal glands during stress affect the numbers of white blood cells and may suppress the immune system in other ways.

The association between emotional stress and immune function also involves the nervous system. Some neurotransmitters secreted when we are relaxed and happy may enhance immunity. In one study, college students were examined just after a vacation and again during final exams. Their immune systems were impaired in various ways during exam week; for example, interferon levels were lower. These and other observations indicate that general health and state of mind affect immunity. Physiological evidence also points to an immune system-nervous system link: Receptors for neurotransmitters have been discovered on the surfaces of lymphocytes, and a network of nerve fibers penetrates deep into the thymus.




