
 AIDS is an immunodeficiency disease caused by a virus

In 1981, health care workers in the United States noticed an increasing number of cases of Kaposi's sarcoma, a cancer of the skin and blood vessels, and of pneumonia caused by Pneumocystis carinii, a protozoan. The increased rates were notable because of the rarity of these diseases among the general population; they were known to occur mainly in severely immunosuppressed individuals. These observations led to the recognition of what came to be known as acquired immuno-deficiency syndrome, or AIDS. People with AIDS are highly susceptible to opportunistic diseases, infections and cancers that take advantage of an immune system in collapse. The Pneumocystis protozoan is a ubiquitous organism, yet it does not cause pneumonia in a person with a healthy immune system. In people with AIDS, opportunistic diseases, neurologic damage, and physiological wasting lead to death.

By 1983, a retrovirus, now called human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), had been identified as the causative agent of AIDS (FIGURE 43.19; also see FIGURE 18.7 and the interview that opens this unit). With the AIDS mortality rate close to 100% , HIV is the most lethal pathogen ever encountered. Molecular studies of HIV reveal that the virus probably evolved from another HIV-like virus in chimpanzees in central Africa and appeared in humans sometime between 1915 and 1940, causing rare cases of infection and AIDS that went unrecognized.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 43-19. A T cell infected with HIV. The viruses (blue) bud continuously from the surface of the T cell (orange; colorized SEM). The cell will die, but only after it produces many copies of its viral killer.

There are two major strains of the virus, HIV-1 and HIV-2. HIV-1 is the more widely distributed and more virulent strain. Both strains infect cells that bear surface CD4 molecules. As you know, CD4 molecules are located on helper T cells and enhance the binding between those cells and class II MHC-bearing antigen-presenting cells. Because CD4 also functions as the major receptor for the virus, helper T cells are highly susceptible to infection. Other cell types that bear fewer CD4 molecules, such as macrophages, some B lymphocytes, and brain cells, are also among the cells infected by HIV.

The entry of the virus requires not only CD4 on the surface of the susceptible cell but also a second protein molecule, a coreceptor. The coreceptors identified so far include fusin (also called CXCR4), found on helper T cells, and CCR5, found on macrophages. Fusin and CCR5 normally function as receptors for chemokines. In fact, these molecules were first recognized as HIV coreceptors after it was discovered that chemokines can suppress HIV-1 infection. Apparently, chemokines bind to these receptors and block HIV-1 entry. Some people who are innately resistant to HIV-1 owe their resistance to defective chemokine receptors. They are not infected because their coreceptors for HIV are faulty.

Once inside a cell, HIV RNA is reverse-transcribed, and the product DNA is integrated into the host cell genome. In this provirus form, the viral genome directs the production of new virus particles (see FIGURE 18.7). Because a retrovirus exists as a provirus for the life of the infected cell, immune responses fail to eradicate it from the body. Even more challenging to both humoral and cell-mediated responses, however, are the frequent mutational changes that occur in each round of virus replication. Indeed, most HIV particles produced in an infected person differ at least slightly from the original infecting virus.

In spite of these challenges, the immune system engages in a prolonged battle against HIV. After an initial peak, the number of viruses in the blood falls while anti-HIV antibody rises (FIGURE 43.20). The decrease in the number of viruses in the blood results from the early immune response to HIV. Detection of the anti-HIV antibodies, which appear in the blood about 1 to 12 months after infection, is the most common method for identifying infected individuals. A person who is HIV-positive is infected, having tested positive for the presence of antibodies to the virus. The HIV antibody test has also been used to screen all blood supplies in the United States since 1985. Because of the chronic presence of virus, a person continues to have anti-HIV antibodies, perhaps until late in AIDS, when both branches of immunity collapse with the loss of helper T cells.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 43-20. The stages of HIV infection.

The early fall in the level of HIV in the blood is misleading, however. While the number of circulating viruses may be low, viruses continue to be produced in cells of the lymph nodes, causing structural and functional damage there. In time, the concentration of HIV in the blood (the viral load) increases. Causes of this increase include the breakdown of lymphatic tissue function, the release of virus from these tissues, and diminishing responses to the infection because of the depletion of helper T cells (see FIGURE 43.20).

Recent studies have revealed that, in HIV infection, helper T cells die because they become infected with the virus. This may sound obvious; cells often die as a result of virus infection. However, other models for T cell depletion have been proposed to explain the apparent loss of helper T cells not infected by HIV. One model, for example, suggests that HIV-mediated interactions induce a T cell to undergo inappropriately timed apoptosis, a process that is normally highly regulated (see FIGURE 21.18). But while such a mechanism may contribute to helper T cell depletion, it is now thought that direct infection is the primary culprit. In fact, the half-life of an actively infected helper T cell (one producing new copies of HIV) is less than 1.5 days.

The time required for an HIV infection to progress to severe helper T cell depletion and AIDS varies greatly, but it currently averages about ten years. During most of this time the individual exhibits only moderate hints of illness, such as swollen lymph nodes (indicating ongoing virus activity) and occasional fever. People with HIV and their physicians follow changes in the level of T cells as an indication of disease progression. However, it has been shown that measures of viral load are a better indicator of disease prognosis and of the effectiveness of anti-HIV treatment.

At this time, HIV infection cannot be cured, and the progression to AIDS cannot be prevented. New drug combinations show promise in slowing this progression, but these therapies are very expensive and not available to all those with HIV infection. Drugs that seem to slow viral replication when used in various combinations include DNA-synthesis inhibitors, reverse transcriptase inhibitors (such as AZT and ddI), and protease inhibitors. Protease inhibitors prevent a key step in the synthesis of HIV proteins. Used simultaneously, these kinds of drugs decrease viral load and therefore allow the number of helper T cells to rise. Also important to people with AIDS are the numerous medicines used to treat the myriad of opportunistic diseases they develop. These drugs may prolong life, but they do not cure AIDS.

Transmission of HIV requires the transfer of body fluids containing infected cells, such as semen or blood, from person to person. Unprotected sex (that is, without a condom) among male homosexuals and transmission via nonsterile needles (typically among intravenous drug users) account for most of the AIDS cases reported thus far in the United States and Europe. However, transmission of HIV among heterosexuals is rapidly increasing as a result of unprotected sex with infected partners. In Africa and Asia, transmission has been primarily by heterosexual sex, especially where there is a high incidence of other sexually transmitted diseases that result in genital lesions. These sores facilitate the transmission of HIV, as the skin barrier (first line of defense) is breached and HIV-susceptible cells, mainly macrophages and helper T cells, are attracted to the area by the inflammatory response.

HIV is not transmitted by casual contact. So far, only one case of HIV transmission by kissing has been reported, and both the person who transmitted the virus and the recipient had bleeding gums. Although this case is isolated, it is important to remember that the virus can be transmitted whenever blood or body secretions are passed from one person to another. Transmission of HIV from mother to child can happen in two ways: during fetal development (as occurs in about 25%  of HIV-infected mothers) and during nursing. HIV antibody screening has virtually eliminated blood transfusions as a route of transmission in developed countries. This test, however, will never completely guarantee a safe blood supply because a person may be infected by the virus for several weeks or months before anti-HIV antibodies become detectable.

As of 2000 the Joint United Nations Program on AIDS estimates that 30 to 40 million people worldwide are living with HIV or HIV/AIDS. Of these, approximately 70%  reside in sub-Saharan Africa. The number of people with AIDS is expected to grow by nearly 20%  per year. The best approach for slowing the spread of HIV is to educate people about the practices that transmit the virus, such as using nonsterile needles and having sex without a condom. Although condoms do not completely eliminate the risk of transmitting HIV (or other similarly transmitted viruses, such as the hepatitis B virus), they do reduce it. Anyone who has sex--vaginal, oral, or anal--with a partner who had unprotected sex with another person during the past two decades risks exposure to HIV.

The immune response is one of many adaptations that enable animals to adjust to the adversities of the environment. The next chapter describes several other processes that help maintain favorable conditions within animals as they cope with varying external environments.




