
 Phagocytic cells, inflammation, and antimicrobial proteins function early in infection

Microbes that penetrate the first line of defense, such as those that enter through a break in the skin, face the second line of defense. The body's internal mechanisms of nonspecific defense depend mainly on phagocytosis, the ingestion of invading organisms by certain types of white cells (see FIGURES 8.19a and 42.15). As you will see, phagocyte function is intimately associated with an effective inflammatory response and also with certain antimicrobial proteins. These nonspecific mechanisms help limit the spread of microbes in advance of specific immune response.

Phagocytic and Natural Killer Cells

The phagocytic cells called neutrophils constitute about 60% -70%  of all white blood cells (leukocytes). Cells damaged by invading microbes release chemical signals that attract neutrophils from the blood. The neutrophils enter the infected tissue, engulfing and destroying microbes there. (This migration toward the source of a chemical attractant is called chemotaxis.) However, neutrophils tend to self-destruct as they destroy foreign invaders, and their average life span is only a few days.

Monocytes, although they constitute only about 5%  of leukocytes, provide an even more effective phagocytic defense. New monocytes circulate in the blood for only a few hours, then migrate into tissues, developing into large macrophages ("big eaters"). Macrophages, the largest phagocytic cells, are especially effective, long-lived phagocytes. These cells extend long pseudopodia that can attach to polysaccharides on a microbe's surface (FIGURE 43.3). A macrophage engulfs a microbe in a vacuole that fuses with a lysosome (like the "food vacuole" in FIGURE 7.14). The lysosome has two ways of killing the trapped microbe. First, it can generate toxic forms of oxygen. Two of these toxic molecules, superoxide anion and nitric oxide, are now thought to be the main antimicrobial agents within phagocytes. Second, lysosomal enzymes, including lysozyme, digest microbial components. Interestingly, some microbes have evolved mechanisms for evading phagocytic destruction. Some bacteria have outer capsules to which a macrophage cannot attach. Others, like Mycobacterium tuberculosis, are readily engulfed but are resistant to lysosomal destruction and can even reproduce inside a macrophage. These microorganisms are a particular problem for both nonspecific and specific defenses of the body.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 43-3. Phagocytosis by a macrophage. This micrograph shows fibril-like pseudopodia of a macrophage attaching to rod-shaped bacteria, which will be ingested and destroyed (colorized SEM).

Some macrophages migrate throughout the body, while others reside permanently in certain tissues: in lung (alveolar macrophages), liver (Kupffer's cells), kidney (mesangial cells), brain (microglial cells), connective tissues (histiocytes), and especially in lymph nodes and the spleen, key organs of the lymphatic system (FIGURE 43.4). The fixed macrophages in the spleen, lymph nodes, and other lymphatic tissues are particularly well located to contact infectious agents. Microorganisms, microbial fragments, and foreign molecules that enter the blood encounter macrophages as they become trapped in the netlike architecture of the spleen, while those in tissue fluid flow into lymph and are filtered through the lymph nodes.

About 1.5%  of all leukocytes are eosinophils. Their main contribution to defense is against larger parasitic invaders, such as the blood fluke Schistosoma mansoni (see FIGURE 33.10). Eosinophils position themselves against the external wall of a parasite and discharge destructive enzymes from cytoplasmic granules. These cells have only limited phagocytic activity.

Nonspecific defense also includes natural killer (NK) cells. NK cells do not attack microorganisms directly; instead, they destroy virus-infected body cells (as well as abnormal body cells that could become cancerous). NK cells are not phagocytic; rather, they mount an attack on the cell's membrane, causing the cell to lyse (burst open).

The Inflammatory Response

Damage to tissue by a physical injury (such as a cut) or by the entry of microorganisms triggers a localized inflammatory response (FIGURE 43.5). In the injured area, precapillary arterioles dilate and postcapillary venules constrict, increasing the local blood supply (see FIGURE 42.7). These events are responsible for the characteristic redness and heat of inflammation (L. inflammo, "to set on fire"). The blood-engorged capillaries leak fluid into neighboring tissues, causing the edema (swelling) also associated with inflammation.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 43-5. A simplified view of the inflammatory response.

The inflammatory response is initiated by chemical signals. Some of these signals arise from the invading organism itself. Others, such as histamine, are released by cells of the body in response to tissue injury. Histamine is produced by circulating leukocytes called basophils and by mast cells found in connective tissue. When injured, these cells release histamine, triggering both dilation and increased permeability of nearby capillaries. Leukocytes and damaged tissue cells also discharge prostaglandins (see discussion of local regulators in Chapter 45) and other substances that further promote blood flow to the site of injury. Enhanced blood flow and vessel permeability aid in delivering clotting elements to the injured area. Blood clotting marks the beginning of the repair process and helps block the spread of microbes to other parts of the body (see FIGURE 42.16).

Increased local blood flow and capillary permeability also enhance the migration of phagocytic cells from the blood into the injured tissues. Probably the most important element of inflammation--indeed, of nonspecific defense--is phagocytosis. Phagocyte migration to the damage site usually begins within an hour after injury. Chemotactic factors released from invading bacteria and injured tissues attract phagocytes. In addition, molecules called chemokines, secreted by blood vessel endothelial cells and monocytes, also attract phagocytes to the area. Chemokines constitute a group of about 50 different proteins that bind to receptors on many types of leukocytes and induce numerous other changes central to inflammation. For example, they induce the production of toxic forms of oxygen in phagocyte lysosomes and the release of histamine from basophils.

Neutrophils are the first phagocytes to arrive at the point of assault, followed by macrophages that have developed from migrating monocytes. Macrophages not only phagocytose pathogens and their products, but also clean up damaged tissue cells and the remains of neutrophils destroyed in the phagocytic process. The pus that accumulates at the site of some infections consists mostly of dead phagocytic cells and the fluid and proteins that leaked from the capillaries during the inflammatory response. Usually, the pus is absorbed by the body within a few days.

A sliver or other minor injury causes localized inflammation, as you have just seen, but the body may also mount a systemic (widespread) nonspecific response to severe tissue damage or infection. Injured cells often put out a call for reinforcements, emitting chemicals that stimulate the release of more neutrophils from the bone marrow. In a severe infection such as meningitis or appendicitis, the number of leukocytes in the blood may increase severalfold within a few hours of the initial inflammatory events. Another systemic response to infection is fever. Toxins produced by pathogens may trigger the fever, but certain leukocytes also release molecules called pyrogens, which set the body's thermostat at a higher temperature. A very high fever may be dangerous, but a moderate fever contributes to defense by inhibiting the growth of some microorganisms. Fever may also facilitate phagocytosis and, by speeding up body reactions, may speed the repair of tissues.

Certain bacterial infections can induce an overwhelming systemic inflammatory response leading to a condition known as septic shock. Characterized by high fever and low blood pressure, septic shock is the most common cause of death in U.S. critical care units. Clearly, while local inflammation is an essential step toward healing, widespread inflammation can be devastating.

Antimicrobial Proteins

A variety of proteins function in nonspecific defense either by attacking microbes directly or by impeding their reproduction. You have already learned about lysozyme, an antimicrobial enzyme present in tears, saliva, and mucous secretions. Other antimicrobial agents include a set of about 20 serum proteins, known collectively as the complement system, that carry out a cascade of steps leading to the lysis of microbes. Some complement components also function along with chemokines in attracting phagocytic cells to sites of infection. Complement proteins are an essential part of both nonspecific and specific defense. We will learn about them in detail later in this chapter.

Another set of proteins that provide nonspecific defense are the interferons, which are secreted by virus-infected cells. While they do not seem to benefit the infected cell, these antiviral proteins diffuse to neighboring cells and induce them to produce other chemicals that inhibit viral reproduction. In this way, interferons limit the cell-to-cell spread of viruses in the body, helping to control viral infections such as colds and influenza. The defense is not virus-specific; interferons produced in response to one virus may confer short-term resistance to unrelated viruses. In addition to its role as an antiviral agent, one type of interferon activates phagocytes, enhancing their ability to ingest and kill microorganisms. Interferons can now be mass-produced by recombinant DNA technology and are being tested clinically for the treatment of viral infections and cancer.

Let's review the body's nonspecific forms of defense: The first line of defense, the skin and mucous membranes, prevents most microbes from entering the body; the second line of defense uses phagocytes, natural killer cells, inflammation, and antimicrobial proteins to defend against microbes that have managed to enter the body. These two lines of defense are nonspecific in that they do not distinguish among pathogens.




