
 Cellular respiration generates many ATP molecules for each sugar molecule it oxidizes: a review

Now that we have looked more closely at the key processes of cellular respiration, let's return to its overall function: harvesting the energy of food for ATP synthesis.

During respiration, most energy flows in this sequence: Glucose NADH  electron transport chain  protonmotive force  ATP. We can do some bookkeeping to calculate the ATP profit when cellular respiration oxidizes a molecule of glucose to six molecules of carbon dioxide. The three main departments of this metabolic enterprise are glycolysis, the Krebs cycle, and the electron transport chain, which drives oxidative phosphorylation. FIGURE 9.16 gives a detailed accounting of the ATP yield per glucose molecule oxidized. The tally adds the few molecules of ATP produced directly by substrate-level phosphorylation during glycolysis and the Krebs cycle to the many more molecules of ATP generated by oxidative phosphorylation. Each NADH that transfers a pair of electrons from food to the electron transport chain contributes enough to the proton-motive force to generate a maximum of about three ATPs. (The average ATP yield per NADH is probably between two and three; we are rounding off to three here to simplify the bookkeeping.) The Krebs cycle also supplies electrons to the electron transport chain via FADH2, but each molecule of this electron carrier is worth a maximum of only about two molecules of ATP.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 9-16. Review: how each molecule of glucose yields many ATP molecules during cellular respiration. The text explains why the yield of 38 ATP per glucose is only an estimate of the maximum output.

In some eukaryotic cells, this lower ATP yield per electron pair also applies to the NADH produced by glycolysis in the cytosol. The mitochondrial inner membrane is impermeable to NADH, so NADH in the cytosol is segregated from the machinery of oxidative phosphorylation. The two electrons of NADH captured in glycolysis must be conveyed into the mitochondrion by one of several electron shuttle systems. Depending on which shuttle is operating, the electrons are passed either to NAD+ or to FAD. If the electrons are passed to FAD, only about 2 ATP can result from each cytosolic NADH2. If passed to mitochondrial NAD+, the yield is closer to 3 ATP.

Assuming that the more energy-efficient type of shuttle is active, we can add a maximum of 34 ATP produced by oxidative phosphorylation to the net of 4 ATP from substrate-level phosphorylation to give a bottom line of 38 ATP. This is only an estimate of the maximum ATP yield from a glucose molecule and is probably somewhat high. One variable that reduces ATP yield is the use of the proton-motive force generated by the redox reactions of respiration to drive other kinds of work. For example, the proton-motive force powers the mitochondrion's uptake of pyruvate from the cytosol.

We can now make a rough estimate of the efficiency of respiration--that is, the percentage of chemical energy stored in glucose that has been restocked in ATP. Recall that the complete oxidation of a mole of glucose releases 686 kcal of energy (DG = -686 kcal/mol). Phosphorylation of ADP to form ATP stores at least 7.3 kcal per mole of ATP (p. 94 explains why this number is probably higher under cellular conditions). Therefore, the efficiency of respiration is 7.3 times 38 (maximum ATP yield per glucose) divided by 686, or about 40% . The rest of the stored energy is lost as heat. We use some of this heat to maintain our relatively high body temperature (37&#176;C), and we dissipate the rest through sweating and other cooling mechanisms. Cellular respiration is remarkably efficient in its energy conversion. By comparison, the most efficient automobile converts only about 25%  of the energy stored in gasoline to move the car.




