
 A complex interplay of hormones regulates reproduction

The Male Pattern

In the male, the principal sex hormones are the androgens, of which testosterone is the most important. Androgens, steroid hormones produced mainly by the Leydig cells of the testes, are directly responsible for the primary and secondary sex characteristics of the male. Primary sex characteristics are those associated with the reproductive system: development of the vasa deferentia and other ducts, development of the external reproductive structures, and sperm production. Secondary sex characteristics are features that are not directly related to the reproductive system, including deepening of the voice, distribution of facial and pubic hair, and muscle growth (androgens stimulate protein synthesis). Androgens are also potent determinants of behavior in mammals and other vertebrates. In addition to specific sexual behaviors and sex drive, androgens increase general aggressiveness and are responsible for such actions as singing in birds and calling by frogs. Hormones from the anterior pituitary and hypothalamus control both androgen secretion and sperm production by the testes (FIGURE 46.14).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 46-14. Hormonal control of the testes. The anterior pituitary secretes two gonadotropic hormones with different effects on the testes, luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). LH and FSH are themselves both regulated by gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) from the hypothalamus. LH, FSH, and GnRH concentrations in the blood are regulated by negative feedback by androgens. GnRH is also controlled by negative feedback from LH and FSH (not shown). In human males, these feedback loops keep the hormones at relatively constant levels, but in many other mammalian species, seasonal cycles in hormone concentration regulate breeding patterns.

The Female Pattern

In the female, the pattern of hormone secretion and the reproductive events the hormones regulate are cyclic, very different from the male pattern. Whereas males produce sperm continuously, females release only one egg or a few eggs at one time during each cycle. Control of the female cycle is quite complex.

Two different types of cycles occur in female mammals. Humans and many other primates have menstrual cycles, whereas other mammals have estrous cycles. In both cases, ovulation occurs at a time in the cycle after the endometrium has started to thicken and develop a rich blood supply, which prepares the uterus for the possible implantation of an embryo. One difference between the two types of cycles involves the fate of the uterine lining if pregnancy does not occur. In menstrual cycles, the endometrium is shed from the uterus through the cervix and vagina in a bleeding called menstruation. In estrous cycles, the endometrium is reabsorbed by the uterus, and no extensive bleeding occurs.

Other major distinctions include more pronounced behavioral changes during estrous cycles than during menstrual cycles and stronger effects of season and climate on estrous cycles. Whereas human females may be receptive to sexual activity throughout their cycles, most mammals will copulate only during the period surrounding ovulation. This period of sexual activity, called estrus (from the Latin oestrus, frenzy, passion), is the only time vaginal changes permit mating. Estrus is sometimes called heat, and indeed the female's body temperature increases slightly. The length and frequency of reproductive cycles vary widely among mammals. The human menstrual cycle averages 28 days (although cycles vary, ranging from about 20 to 40 days). In contrast, the estrous cycle of the rat is only 5 days. Bears and dogs have one cycle per year, but elephants cycle several times per year.

Let's examine the reproductive cycle of the human female in more detail as a case study of how a complex function is coordinated by hormones. The term menstrual cycle refers specifically to the changes that occur in the uterus (FIGURE 46.15, p. 988). By convention, the first day of a woman's menstrual period, the first day of menstruation, is designated day 1 of the cycle. The menstrual flow phase of the cycle, during which menstrual bleeding (loss of most of the functional layer of the endometrium) occurs, usually persists for a few days (FIGURE 46.15d). Then the thin remaining endometrium begins to regenerate and thicken for a week or two, during what is called the proliferative phase of the menstrual cycle. During the last phase, the secretory phase, usually about two weeks in duration, the endometrium continues to thicken, becomes more vascularized, and develops glands that secrete a fluid rich in glycogen. If an embryo has not implanted in the uterine lining by the end of the secretory phase, a new menstrual flow commences, marking day 1 of the next cycle.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 46-15. The reproductive cycle of the human female. Hormones coordinate the ovarian and menstrual cycles, preparing the uterine lining (endometrium) for implantation of an embryo even before ovulation. (a) Changes in LH and FSH levels. (b) Changes in the levels of estrogens and progesterone. (c) The ovarian cycle consists of a follicular phase, during which follicles grow and secrete increasing amounts of estrogens; ovulation; and a luteal phase, during which the corpus luteum secretes estrogens and progesterone. Length of the follicular phase varies; the luteal phase usually lasts 13 to 15 days. (d) The menstrual cycle consists of a menstrual flow phase, a proliferative phase, and a secretory phase. Menstruation, the shedding of the endometrium, occurs during the menstrual flow phase. The first day of flow marks day 1 of the menstrual cycle. During the proliferative phase, estrogens from the growing follicle stimulate the endometrium to thicken and become increasingly vascularized. During the secretory phase, the endometrium continues to thicken, its arteries enlarge, and endometrial glands grow. These endometrial changes require estrogens and progesterone, secreted by the corpus luteum after ovulation. Thus, the secretory phase of the menstrual cycle parallels the luteal phase of the ovarian cycle. Disintegration of the corpus luteum at the end of the luteal phase reduces the amount of estrogens and progesterone available to the endometrium, so it is shed. In the event of pregnancy, additional mechanisms maintain high levels of estrogens and progesterone, preventing loss of the endometrium.

Paralleling the menstrual cycle is an ovarian cycle (FIGURE 46.15c). It begins with the follicular phase, during which several follicles in the ovary begin to grow. The developing egg cell in each of these follicles enlarges, and its coat of follicle cells thickens. Of the several follicles that start to grow, however, only one usually continues to enlarge and mature while the others disintegrate. The maturing follicle develops an internal fluid-filled cavity and grows very large, forming a bulge near the surface of the ovary. The follicular phase ends with ovulation, when the follicle and adjacent wall of the ovary rupture, releasing the secondary oocyte. The follicular tissue that remains in the ovary after ovulation develops into the corpus luteum. Endocrine cells of the corpus luteum secrete female hormones during the luteal phase of the ovarian cycle. The next cycle begins with a new growth of follicles.

Hormones coordinate the menstrual and ovarian cycles in such a way that growth of the follicle and ovulation are synchronized with preparation of the uterine lining for possible implantation of an embryo. Five hormones participate in an elaborate scheme involving both positive and negative feedback. These hormones are gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), secreted by the hypothalamus; follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH), the two gonadotropins secreted by the anterior pituitary; and estrogens (a family of closely related hormones) and progesterone, the female sex hormones secreted by the ovaries. The relative levels of the pituitary and ovarian hormones in blood plasma are graphed in FIGURE 46.15a and b, and correlated with the phases of the ovarian and menstrual cycles. As you read the following discussion, refer to the figure as a guide to understanding how the hormones regulate the female reproductive system.

During the follicular phase of the ovarian cycle, the pituitary secretes small amounts of FSH and LH in response to stimulation by GnRH from the hypothalamus. At this time, the cells of immature ovarian follicles have receptors for FSH but not for LH. The FSH stimulates follicle growth, and the cells of these growing follicles secrete estrogens. Notice in FIGURE 46.15b that there is a slow rise in the amount of estrogens secreted during most of the follicular phase. This small increase in estrogens inhibits secretion of the pituitary hormones, keeping the levels of FSH and LH relatively low during most of the follicular phase. These hormonal relationships change radically and rather abruptly when the rate of secretion of estrogens by the growing follicle begins to rise steeply. Whereas a slow rise of estrogens inhibits the secretion of pituitary gonadotropins, a high concentration of estrogens has the opposite effect and stimulates the secretion of gonadotropins by acting on the hypothalamus to increase its output of GnRH. You can see this response in FIGURE 46.15a as a steep increase of FSH and LH levels that occurs soon after the increase in the concentration of estrogens. The effect is greater for LH because the high concentration of estrogens, in addition to stimulating GnRH secretion, also increases the sensitivity of LH-releasing mechanisms in the pituitary to the hypothalamic signal (GnRH). By now, the follicles have receptors for LH and can respond to this hormonal cue. In an example of positive feedback, the increase in LH concentration caused by increased secretion of estrogens from the growing follicle induces final maturation of the follicle, and ovulation occurs about a day after the LH surge.

Following ovulation, LH stimulates the transformation of the follicular tissue left behind in the ovary to form the corpus luteum, a glandular structure. (It is for this "luteinizing" function that LH is named.) Under continued stimulation by LH during the luteal phase of the ovarian cycle, the corpus luteum secretes estrogens and a second steroid hormone, progesterone. The corpus luteum usually reaches its maximum development about 8 to 10 days after ovulation. As the levels of progesterone and estrogens rise, the combination of these hormones exerts negative feedback on the hypothalamus and pituitary, inhibiting the secretion of LH and FSH. Near the end of the luteal phase, the corpus luteum disintegrates (possibly a result of prostaglandins secreted by its own cells). Consequently, concentrations of estrogens and progesterone decline sharply. The dropping levels of ovarian hormones liberate the hypothalamus and pituitary from the inhibitory effects of these hormones. The pituitary then begins to secrete enough FSH to stimulate the growth of new follicles in the ovary, initiating the follicular phase of the next ovarian cycle.

How is the ovarian cycle synchronized with the menstrual cycle? Estrogens, secreted in increasing amounts by growing follicles, are a hormonal signal to the uterus, causing the endometrium to thicken. Thus, the follicular phase of the ovarian cycle is coordinated with the proliferative phase of the menstrual cycle. Before ovulation, the uterus is already being prepared for a possible embryo. After ovulation, estrogens and progesterone secreted by the corpus luteum stimulate continued development and maintenance of the endometrium, including an enlargement of arteries supplying blood to the uterine lining and the growth of endometrial glands that secrete a nutrient fluid that can sustain an early embryo before it actually implants in the uterine lining. Thus, the luteal phase of the ovarian cycle is coordinated with the secretory phase of the menstrual cycle. The rapid drop in the level of ovarian hormones when the corpus luteum disintegrates causes spasms of arteries in the uterine lining that deprive the endometrium of blood. Disintegration of the endometrium results in menstruation and the beginning of a new menstrual cycle. In the meantime, ovarian follicles that will stimulate renewed thickening of the endometrium are just beginning to grow. Cycle after cycle, the maturation and release of egg cells from the ovary is integrated with changes in the uterus, the organ that must accommodate an embryo if the egg cell is fertilized. In the absence of pregnancy, a new cycle begins. We will soon see that there are "override" mechanisms that prevent disintegration of the endometrium in the event of pregnancy.

In addition to their role in coordinating reproductive cycles, estrogens are also responsible for the secondary sex characteristics of the female. The hormones induce deposition of fat in the breasts and hips, increase water retention, affect calcium metabolism, stimulate breast development, and mediate female sexual behavior.

Menopause. On average, human females undergo menopause, the cessation of ovulation and menstruation, between the ages of 46 and 54. Apparently, during these years the ovaries lose their responsiveness to gonadotropins (the hormones FSH and LH) from the pituitary, and menopause results from a decline in production of estrogens by the ovary. Menopause is an unusual phenomenon; in most species, females as well as males retain their reproductive capacity throughout life. Is there an evolutionary explanation for menopause? Why might natural selection have favored females who stopped reproducing? One intriguing (and highly controversial) hypothesis proposes that during early human evolution, undergoing menopause after having some children actually increased a woman's fitness; losing the ability to reproduce allowed her to provide better care for her children and grandchildren, thereby increasing the survival of individuals bearing her genes.




