
 The eggs of most vertebrates have cytoplasmic determinants that help establish the body axes and differences among cells of the early embryo

In order to understand at the molecular level how embryonic cells acquire their fates, we must return to the question of how the basic axes of the embryo are established. It turns out that much of what you learned in Chapter 21 about the roles of cytoplasmic determinants in the development of fruit flies also applies to vertebrate animals.

Polarity and the Basic Body Plan

As you have learned, a bilaterally symmetrical animal has an anterior-posterior axis, a dorsal-ventral axis, and left and right sides. Establishing this basic body plan is a first step in morphogenesis and is prerequisite to the development of tissues and organs. In mammals, polarity is not obvious until after cleavage, although recent research suggests that the location at which the sperm enters the egg plays a role in determining the axes. However, in most species, basic instructions (where the head end will be, and so on) are set down earlier. For example, in many frogs, as we saw in FIGURE 47.7, the locations of melanin and yolk in the unfertilized egg respectively define the animal and vegetal hemispheres, which in turn determine the anterior-posterior body axis. Fertilization then triggers the formation of the gray crescent, whose position determines the dorsal-ventral axis.

Restriction of Cellular Potency

The asymmetric distribution of cytoplasmic determinants in an egg does not necessarily lead to differences among the earliest blastomeres. The first cleavage may occur along an axis that produces two identical blastomeres, which will have equal developmental potential. This is what happens in amphibians, for instance. The first two blastomeres are similar, and if they are experimentally separated, each can develop into a normal tadpole. In other words, both blastomeres are totipotent. However, in experiments in which the entire gray crescent goes to one blastomere, only that blastomere has the capacity to develop into a normal tadpole when the blastomeres are separated (FIGURE 47.21). Thus, the fates of embryonic cells can be affected not only by the distribution of cytoplasmic determinants but also by the zygote's characteristic pattern of cleavage.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 47-21. Experimental demonstration of the importance of cytoplasmic determinants in amphibians. The first cleavage division of an amphibian zygote normally divides the gray crescent evenly between the two blastomeres, which retain their totipotency after the division (left). However, when one blastomere receives the entire gray crescent (right), only that blastomere develops normally. The other blastomere, lacking cytoplasmic determinants present in the crescent, gives rise to an abnormal embryo without dorsal structures.

In many species, only the zygote is totipotent. The first cleavage plane divides cytoplasmic determinants in such a way that each blastomere will give rise only to specific parts of the embryo. In contrast, the cells of mammalian embryos remain totipotent until they become arranged into the trophoblast and inner cell mass of the blastocyst. The early blastomeres of mammals seem to receive equivalent amounts of cytoplasmic components from the egg. Indeed, up to the eight-cell stage, the blastomeres of a mammalian embryo all look alike, and each can form a complete embryo if isolated.

However similar or different the cells in an early embryo, the progressive restriction of potency is a general feature of development in all animals. In some species the cells of early gastrulas retain the capacity to give rise to more than one kind of cell, though they have lost their totipotency. If left alone, the dorsal ectoderm of an early amphibian gastrula will develop into a neural plate above the notochord. If the dorsal ectoderm is experimentally replaced with ectoderm from some other location, the transplanted tissue will form a neural plate. If the same experiment is performed on a late-stage gastrula, however, the transplanted ectoderm will not respond to its new location and will not form a neural plate. In general, the tissue-specific fates of cells in late gastrulae are fixed. Even when they are manipulated experimentally, cells of late gastrulae usually give rise to the same types of cell as in the normal embryo.




