
 Variation in carbon skeletons contributes to the diversity of organic molecules

Carbon chains form the skeletons of most organic molecules. The skeletons vary in length and may be straight, branched, or arranged in closed rings (FIGURE 4.4). Some carbon skeletons have double bonds, which vary in number and location. Such variation in carbon skeletons is one important source of the molecular complexity and diversity that characterize living matter. In addition, atoms of other elements can be bonded to the skeletons at available sites.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 4-4. Variations in carbon skeletons. Hydrocarbons, organic molecules consisting only of carbon and hydrogen, illustrate the diversity of the carbon skeletons of organic molecules.

All the molecules shown in FIGURE 4.2 and 4.4 are hydrocarbons, organic molecules consisting only of carbon and hydrogen. Atoms of hydrogen are attached to the carbon skeleton wherever electrons are available for covalent bonding. Hydrocarbons are the major components of petroleum, which is called a fossil fuel because it consists of the partially decomposed remains of organisms that lived millions of years ago.

Although hydrocarbons are not prevalent in living organisms, many of a cell's organic molecules have regions consisting of only carbon and hydrogen. For example, the molecules known as fats have long hydrocarbon tails attached to a nonhydrocarbon component (FIGURE 4.5). Neither petroleum nor fat mixes with water; both are hydrophobic compounds because the bonds between the carbon and hydrogen atoms are nonpolar. Another characteristic of hydrocarbons is that they store a relatively large amount of energy. The gasoline that fuels a car consists of hydrocarbons, and the hydrocarbon tails of fat molecules serve as stored fuel for animal bodies.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 4-5. The role of hydrocarbons in fats. (a) A fat molecule consists of a headpiece and three hydrocarbon tails. The tails store energy and account for the hydrophobic behavior of fats. (Black = carbon; gray = hydrogen; red = oxygen) (b) Mammalian adipose cells stockpile fat molecules as a fuel reserve. Each adipose cell in this micrograph is almost filled by a large fat droplet, which stockpiles a huge number of fat molecules.

Isomers

Variation in the architecture of organic molecules can be seen in isomers, compounds that have the same molecular formula but different structures and hence different properties. Compare, for example, the two butanes in FIGURE 4.4b. Both have the molecular formula C4H10, but they differ in the covalent arrangement of their carbon skeletons. The skeleton is straight in butane, but branched in isobutane. We will examine three types of isomers: structural isomers, geometric isomers, and enantiomers (FIGURE 4.6).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 4-6. Three types of isomers. Compounds with the same molecular formula but different structures, isomers are a source of diversity in organic molecules.

Structural isomers differ in the covalent arrangements of their atoms. The number of possible isomers increases tremendously as carbon skeletons increase in size. There are only two butanes, but there are 18 variations of C8H18 and 366,319 possible structural isomers of C20H42. Structural isomers may also differ in the location of double bonds.

Geometric isomers have the same covalent partnerships, but they differ in their spatial arrangements. Geometric isomers arise from the inflexibility of double bonds, which, unlike single bonds, will not allow the atoms they join to rotate freely about the bond axis. The subtle difference in shape between geometric isomers can dramatically affect the biological activities of organic molecules. For example, the biochemistry of vision involves a light-induced change of rhodopsin, a chemical compound in the eye, from one geometric isomer to another.

Enantiomers are molecules that are mirror images of each other. In the ball-and-stick models shown in FIGURE 4.6c, the middle carbon is called an asymmetric carbon because it is attached to four different atoms or groups of atoms. The four groups can be arranged in space about the asymmetric carbon in two different ways that are mirror images. They are, in a way, left-handed and right-handed versions of the molecule. A cell can distinguish these isomers based on their different shapes. Usually, one isomer is biologically active and the other is inactive.

The concept of enantiomers is important in the pharmaceutical industry because the two enantiomers of a drug may not be equally effective (FIGURE 4.7). In some cases, one of the isomers may even produce harmful effects. This was the case with thalidomide, a drug prescribed for thousands of pregnant women in the late 1950s and early 1960s. The drug was a mixture of two enantiomers. One enantiomer reduced morning sickness, the desired effect, but the other caused severe birth defects. (And unfortunately, even if the "good" thalidomide enantiomer is used in purified form, some of it soon converts to the "bad" enantiomer in the patient's body.) The differing effects of enantiomers in the body demonstrate that organisms are sensitive to even the most subtle variations in molecular architecture. Once again, we see that molecules have emergent properties that depend on the specific arrangement of their atoms.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 4-7. The pharmacological importance of enantiomers. L-Dopa is a drug used to treat Parkinson's disease, a disorder of the central nervous system. The drug's enantiomer, the mirror-image molecule designated D-Dopa, has no effect on patients.




