
 Deep-diving air-breathers stockpile oxygen and deplete it slowly

The majority of animals can exchange gases continuously, but sometimes there is no access to the normal respiratory medium--for example, when an air-breather swims underwater. Most humans, even well-trained divers, can only hold their breath for 2 or 3 minutes and swim to depths of 20 m or so, but the Weddell seal shown in FIGURE 42.30 routinely plunges to 200-500 m and remains there for about 20 minutes (sometimes for more than an hour). Large penguins can dive to similar depths, and some species of seals, sea turtles, and whales make even more impressive dives. Elephant seals can reach depths of 1,500 m--almost a mile--and stay submerged for as much as two hours! One elephant seal carrying a recording device spent 40 days at sea diving almost continuously, with no surface period longer than 6 minutes. What physiological adaptations allow these air-breathers to perform so well underwater?



Click image to enlarge



Fig 42-30. The Weddell seal, Leptonychotes weddelli, a deep-diving mammal. Adaptations of the circulatory and respiratory systems enable this Antarctic seal to travel underwater for more than an hour.

One adaptation of the Weddell seal (and other divers) is an ability to store large amounts of oxygen. Compared to humans, the seal can store about twice as much oxygen per kilogram of body weight, mostly in the blood and muscles. About 36%  of our total oxygen is in our lungs, and 51%  is in our blood. In contrast, the Weddell seal holds only about 5%  of its oxygen in its relatively small lungs (and may exhale before diving to reduce buoyancy), stockpiling 70%  in the blood. The seal has about twice the volume of blood per kilogram of body weight as a human. Another adaptation is the seal's huge spleen, which can store about 24 L of blood. The spleen probably contracts after a dive begins, fortifying the blood with red blood cells loaded with oxygen. Diving mammals also have a high concentration of an oxygen-storing protein called myoglobin in their muscles. The Weddell seal can store about 25%  of its oxygen in muscle, compared to only 13%  in humans.

Diving vertebrates not only begin an underwater trip with a relatively large O2 stockpile, they also have adaptations that conserve oxygen. They swim with little muscular effort and often use buoyancy changes to glide passively upward or downward. Their heart rate and O2 consumption rate decrease during a dive, and regulatory mechanisms affecting peripheral resistance route most blood to the brain, spinal cord, eyes, adrenal glands, and placenta (in pregnant seals). Blood supply to the muscles is restricted, and is shut off altogether during the longest dives. During dives of more than about 20 minutes, a Weddell seal's muscles deplete the oxygen stored in myoglobin and then derive their ATP from fermentation instead of respiration (see Chapter 9).

The unusual abilities of the Weddell seal and other air-breathing divers to power their bodies during long dives showcase a central theme in our study of organisms--the response to environmental pressures over the short term by physiological adjustments and over the long term by natural selection.

We have seen throughout this chapter that the circulatory and respiratory systems cooperate extensively. The main function of the respiratory system--to supply O2 and dispose of CO2 in support of cellular bioenergetics--depends on the transport work of the circulatory system. Still another activity of the body that depends on the circulatory system is defense against disease, which we will examine in the next chapter.




