
 Invertebrate chordates provide clues to the origin of vertebrates

Members of the two subphyla of invertebrate chordates, Urochordata and Cephalochordata, illustrate the chordate body plan in its most "stripped-down" versions--without the additional features that evolved in vertebrates. The study of urochordates and cephalochordates also provides clues to the origin of vertebrates.

Subphylum Urochordata

Urochordates are commonly called tunicates. Most tunicates are sessile marine animals that adhere to rocks, docks, and boats (FIGURE 34.3a). Others are planktonic. Some species are colonial. Seawater enters the animal through an incurrent siphon, passes through the pharyngeal slits into a chamber called the atrium, and exits through an excurrent siphon, or atriopore (FIGURE 34.3b). The food filtered from this water current by a mucous net is passed by cilia into the intestine. The anus empties into the excurrent siphon. The entire animal is cloaked in a tunic made of a celluloselike carbohydrate. Because they shoot a jet of water through the excurrent siphon when molested, tunicates are also called sea squirts.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-3. Subphylum Urochordata: a tunicate. (a) An adult tunicate, or sea squirt, is a sessile animal commonly arranged in a U shape (photo is approximately life-sized). (b) In the adult, prominent pharyngeal slits function in suspension feeding, but the other chordate characteristics are not obvious. (c) In the tunicate larva, which is a free-swimming but nonfeeding "tadpole," the chordate characteristics are evident: It has a notochord, dorsal nerve tube, and a tail with muscle segments.

The adult tunicate scarcely resembles a chordate. It displays no trace of a notochord, nor is there a nerve cord or tail. Only the pharyngeal slits suggest a link to other chordates. But all four chordate trademarks are manifest in the larval form of some groups of tunicates (FIGURE 34.3c). The larva swims until it attaches by its head to a surface and undergoes metamorphosis, during which most of its chordate characteristics disappear.

Subphylum Cephalochordata

Known as lancelets because of their bladelike shape, cephalochordates closely resemble the idealized chordate in FIGURE 34.2. The notochord; dorsal, hollow nerve cord; numerous gill slits; and postanal tail all persist into the adult stage (FIGURE 34.4). Lancelets are small animals, only a few centimeters long, that live in the sand at the bottom of the sea in coastal regions. Globally they are rare, but they live at huge densities (over 5,000 lancelets per square meter) in a small number of places, including one at Tampa Bay, Florida. Lancelets wriggle backward into the sand, leaving only their anterior end exposed. A mucous net secreted across the pharyngeal slits traps tiny food particles from seawater drawn into the mouth by ciliary pumping. The water exits through the slits, and the trapped food passes down the digestive tube. Animals such as lancelets that feed on small particles suspended in the water are called suspension feeders, and early chordates, until the evolution of fishes with jaws and teeth, were all suspension feeders. In the lancelet, the pharynx and gill slits are feeding structures, and only to a minor extent respiratory structures; gas exchange takes place mainly across regions of the external body surface.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-4. Subphylum Cephalochordata: the lancelet Branchiostoma. (a) This small invertebrate displays all four chordate characteristics. The pharyngeal slits function in suspension feeding. Water passes into the pharynx and through slits into the atrium, a chamber that vents to the outside via the atriopore. Food particles trapped by mucus are swept by cilia into the digestive tract. (b) The muscle segments you can see in this photo of a lancelet produce the sinusoidal swimming of these animals.

A lancelet frequently leaves its burrow and swims to a new location. Though feeble swimmers, these invertebrate chordates display, in simple form, the swimming mechanism of fishes. Coordinated contraction of muscles serially arranged like rows of chevrons (&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;) along the sides of the notochord flexes the notochord, producing side-to-side undulations that thrust the body forward. This serial musculature is evidence of the lancelet's segmentation. The muscle segments develop from blocks of mesoderm called somites arranged along each side of the notochord of a chordate embryo. Chordates are segmented animals.

The Relationship Between Invertebrate Chordates and Vertebrates

Molecular evidence suggests that the cephalochordates are the vertebrates' closest relatives, and urochordates are their next closest relatives (see FIGURE 34.1). According to one hypothesis, there were two stages in the evolution of vertebrates from invertebrates: In the first stage, an ancestral cephalochordate evolved from a form resembling a modern urochordate larva; in the second stage, a vertebrate evolved from a cephalochordate. The first stage may have been preceded by paedogenesis, the precocious development of sexual maturity in a larva (see Chapter 24). Notice that a cephalochordate appears more akin to a urochordate larva than to an adult urochordate (compare FIGURES 34.3 and 34.4). Changes in genes controlling development can alter the timing of developmental events, such as the maturation of gonads. Perhaps such a change occurred in the ancestor of cephalochordates and vertebrates, causing the gonads to mature in swimming larvae before the onset of metamorphosis to the sessile adult form. If reproducing larvae were very successful, natural selection may have reinforced paedo genesis and eliminated metamorphosis.

There is no fossil evidence to support or contradict the paedogenetic hypothesis; it is deduced from comparing modern forms. But fossil evidence does tell us something about the second stage, from cephalochordate to vertebrate. In 1999, paleontologists reported that fossils from a site in China support the idea that cephalochordates are the closest relatives of vertebrates. The 530-million-year-old fossils appear to blur the distinction between cephalochordates and vertebrates by showing a series of "missing links" (FIGURE 34.5). Vertebrates, as we consider further below, differ from lancelets in having a much more elaborate brain--an enlargement of the nerve cord at the anterior end--and a braincase, or cranium. One Chinese fossil, Haikouella, seems to have a brain but may lack a cranium (skull). It also (unlike the lancelet) has eyes, and hardened structures called "denticles" in its pharynx, which may have functioned somewhat like teeth. Otherwise, Haikouella resembles the lancelet. It has tentacles around its mouth and was probably a suspension feeder. This animal had some vertebrate characteristics (brain) but not others (cranium). Another Chinese fossil from the same area, Haikouichthys, seems to have a cranium and may be the earliest fossil with a full set of vertebrate characteristics. The discovery of these Chinese fossils pushes the origin of vertebrates back to the Cambrian explosion (see Chapter 32).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-5. Early fossil vertebrates. These fossils were discovered in 1999 near the town of Haikou in southern China. They date back to the early Cambrian period, about 530 million years ago. (a) Fossils of Haikouella are about 2-3 cm long. Based on detailed study of over 300 specimens fossilized in a variety of body positions, researchers have been able to describe many anatomical details of this species. Haikouella resembled a modern cephalochordate, but with such vertebrate characters as eyes, mineralized toothlike structures, and what seems to be an enlarged brain. However, there is no evidence of a cranium (braincase), a character found in all true modern vertebrates. Thus, Haikouella may represent animals that were transitional in the evolution of vertebrates from invertebrate chordates. (b) Haikouichthys, about the same size as Haikouella, probably had a cranium, making it a full-fledged vertebrate. (c) Based on fossils from the same Chinese sediments, an artist reconstructed Myllokunmingia, which is very similar to Haikouichthys. These earliest known vertebrates, in contrast to lancelets (cephalochordates), were more mobile and were probably predators rather than suspension feeders.




