
FISHES AND AMPHIBIANS

 

 Vertebrate jaws evolved from skeletal supports of the pharyngeal slits



 

 Class Chondrichthyes: Sharks and rays have cartilaginous skeletons



 

 Osteichthyes: The extant classes of bony fishes are the ray-finned fishes, the lobe-finned fishes, and the lungfishes



 

 Tetrapods evolved from specialized fishes that inhabited shallow water



 

 Class Amphibia: Salamanders, frogs, and caecilians are the three extant amphibian orders



During the late Silurian period and early Devonian period, gnathostomes largely replaced the agnathans. The two extant groups of fishes--Chondrichthyes (the cartilaginous fishes: sharks and rays) and Osteichthyes (the bony fishes: ray-finned fishes, lobe-finned fishes, and lungfishes)--first appeared during that time. There is also a substantial fossil record of the armored, jawed fishes called placoderms ("plate skinned"), which are completely extinct. Most placoderms were less than a meter long, though some giants measured more than 10 m.

In addition to jaws, fishes also have two pairs of fins, whereas agnathans either lacked paired appendages or had a single pair. By studying the developmental genetics of extant vertebrates, biologists in the "evo-devo" field have found that differential expression of some of the Hox genes may determine whether one or two sets of paired appendages develop in a vertebrate embryo (see Chapters 21 and 25).

Jaws and paired fins were major evolutionary breakthroughs in vertebrate history. Jaws are hinged structures that, especially with the help of teeth, enable the animal to grip food items firmly and slice them up. A jawed fish can exploit food supplies that were unavailable to earlier agnathans, which fed mainly on food particles suspended in the water or located on the sea bottom. Paired fins, along with the tail, enable fishes to maneuver accurately while swimming, analogous to an airplane's movements of wing flaps and tail rudder for ascending, descending, and turning. With their jaws and paired fins, many species of fishes were active predators, capable of chasing prey and biting off chunks of flesh. Thus, these modifications of the early vertebrate body plan allowed the diversification of both lifestyles and nutrient sources, which may explain why jawed fishes replaced most agnathans during the Devonian period.




