
 The brain's processing of sensory input and motor output is cyclical rather than linear

We can trace the origins of sensing and acting back to the appearance, in simple prokaryotes, of cellular structures able to sense pressure or chemicals in the environment and then direct movement in an appropriate direction. These structures have been transformed during evolution into diverse mechanisms specialized to sense different types of energy and generate many different levels of physical movement in response. Alongside the evolution of the wide variety of sensory receptors that we will describe in the first section of this chapter, the brain mechanisms described in Chapter 48 also evolved. These processes in the brain interpret sensory input and organize motor output to the different kinds of effector organs described in the second portion of the chapter.

Although it is customary to think of sensations causing brain changes which then cause action as a linear process--sensing  brain analysis  action--such a description implies that an animal is rather like a computer passively waiting for instructions before it acts. This is not the case. All animals are in constant motion, probing the environment with that motion, sensing the changes that result, and then using the information to generate the next action. This is a continuous cycle rather than a linear sequence, the brain carrying on background activity which is constantly updated as sensing and acting proceed (FIGURE 49.1).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 49-1. Catching a fly ball is no simple feat. From the moment the bat makes contact, a cycle of sensory input, processing in the brain, and responses by muscles eventually place the fielder's glove in the right place at the right time. Brain activity is constantly updated as it senses how the position of the body and glove relative to the ball's flight has been changed by the previous instant's motor output. And, of course, experience (learning and practice) enhance this marvel of coordination.

Sensations begin as different forms of energy such as light, heat, sound, and smells are detected by specialized sensory receptor cells and ultimately converted to action potentials that travel to the brain. In most vertebrates, sensory signals generally go first to the thalamus, the gateway to the cerebral cortex (see FIGURE 48.20). This gateway is influenced by instructions coming back from the cortex selecting which sensory input seems more important at the moment. The information is then sent on to the many parts of the brain that contribute to forming our perceptions, our awareness and interpretation of the stimuli. For example, information relevant to identifying sounds or visual objects streams mainly to regions of the temporal lobes, while information about their motion and location is sent to the parietal lobes. Limbic regions are central in determining the importance of the sensory input to the organism (see FIGURES 48.24b and 48.27). Our memories of similar sounds and objects can strongly influence our final perceptions, so that in some cases we perceive what we expect to hear or see, rather than what is really there. Thus the process of perception starts with a fairly simple input--information about physical sensations carried by action potentials to the brain--and ends with a very complex result that can be biased by our history of sensing.

This description of simple sensations leading to complex perceptions invites a comparison with the subsequent motor actions that drive behaviors. A relatively simple outcome--action potentials in many motor neurons driving the contraction of striated muscles to produce a single coordinated behavior--has an extremely complex beginning. At the same time that information about the location, identity, and meaning of objects in the world streams forward to higher centers in the frontal lobes associated with making behavioral choices, motor-planning regions of the neocortex, basal ganglia, and cerebellum are evaluating a vast array of learned skills--movement programs that are potential responses. The single motor behavior chosen for the next moment is the result of a very complex decision-making mechanism.

We considered the complexity of information processing in the brain in Chapter 48, and we wanted to remind you of that complexity at the beginning of this chapter. However, the main purpose of this chapter is not to deal further with these cognitive processes, but rather to examine, in several different invertebrate and vertebrate groups, the beginning and the end of sensing and acting. We start first with sensory processes--how information about the external and internal environment is collected and conveyed to the brain--and then consider the structure and function of muscles that carry out the movement instructions generated by the brain.




