
 Most animal phyla originated in a relatively brief span of geologic time

The fossil record and molecular studies concur that the diversification that produced the many animal phyla occurred rapidly on the vast scale of geologic time. This relatively brief evolutionary episode probably lasted about 40 million years (about 565 to 525 million years ago) during the late Precambrian and early Cambrian (which began about 543 million years ago).

Paleontologists have named the last period of the Precambrian era the Ediacaran period, for the Ediacara Hills of Australia, where fossils of Precambrian animals were first discovered. The fossils range in age from about 565 to 543 million years old. Similar animals of the same vintage have since been found on other continents. There is some evidence that animal life began earlier, and maybe much earlier. In 2000, researchers reported the discovery of fossilized animal embryos in Chinese strata that are 570 million years old (see FIGURE 26.7). And in 1998, a team of paleontologists discovered what could be fossilized burrows of animals in rocks that are 1.1 billion years old. By themselves, these putative trace fossils of animals would not convince many biologists to push back the origin of animals so far. However, the data of molecular systematics also suggest an animal origin about a billion years ago. That would mean that the genesis of animals was part of an early diversification of multicellular eukaryotes, known mainly from fossils of algae (see FIGURE 26.6). Until there is more solid evidence for such ancient animals, however, all we know for sure is that a diversity of animals had evolved by the time of the Ediacaran period. Most of the Ediacaran fossils appear to represent cnidarians (animals similar to hydras), but soft-bodied mollusks (similar to a modern group called the chitons) were also present, and numerous fossilized burrows and tracks indicate the activities of several forms of worms.

In contrast to the relatively limited variety of Ediacaran animals, nearly all the major animal body plans appear in Cambrian rocks dating from 543 to 525 million years ago. During this relatively short span, a burst of animal origins called the Cambrian explosion left a rich fossil assemblage that includes the first animals with hard, mineralized skeletons (see FIGURE 26.8). The Burgess Shale in British Columbia, Canada, is the most famous fossil bed documenting the diversity of Cambrian animals. Two other fossil sites, one in Greenland and the other in the Yunnan region of China, predate the Burgess Shale by more than 10 million years. Burgess Shale fossils are rather bizarre-looking in the context of the marine animals we know today (FIGURE 32.13). Some of these Cambrian forms may represent extinct "experiments" in animal diversity. However, most of the Cambrian fossils, as strange as they may appear to us, are simply ancient variations within the taxonomic boundaries of phyla still represented in the modern fauna. Indeed, the number of exclusively Cambrian phyla seems to be dropping as the fossils are studied more closely and are classified in extant phyla.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 32-13. A sample of some of the animals that evolved during the Cambrian explosion. This drawing is based on fossils collected from the Burgess Shale in British Columbia, Canada.

On the scale of geologic time, animals diversified so rapidly that it is difficult from the fossil record to sort out the sequence of branching in animal phylogeny. And that is why, when reconstructing the evolutionary history of animal phyla, systematists depend largely on clues from the comparative anatomy, embryology, developmental genetics, and molecular systematics of extant species.




