
Chapter 54: ECOSYSTEMS

THE ECOSYSTEM APPROACH TO ECOLOGY

   Trophic relationships determine the routes of energy flow and chemical cycling in an ecosystem

   Decomposition connects all trophic levels

   The laws of physics and chemistry apply to ecosystems



PRIMARY PRODUCTION IN ECOSYSTEMS

   An ecosystem's energy budget depends on primary production

   In aquatic ecosystems, light and nutrients limit primary production

   In terrestrial ecosystems, temperature, moisture, and nutrients limit primary production



SECONDARY PRODUCTION IN ECOSYSTEMS

   The efficiency of energy transfer between trophic levels is usually less than 20% 

   Herbivores consume a small percentage of vegetation: the green world hypothesis



THE CYCLING OF CHEMICAL ELEMENTS IN ECOSYSTEMS

   Biological and geologic processes move nutrients among organic and inorganic compartments

   Decomposition rates largely determine the rates of nutrient cycling

   Nutrient cycling is strongly regulated by vegetation



HUMAN IMPACT ON ECOSYSTEMS AND THE BIOSPHERE

   The human population is disrupting chemical cycles throughout the biosphere

   Combustion of fossil fuels is the main cause of acid precipitation

   Toxins can become concentrated in successive trophic levels of food webs

   Human activities may be causing climate change by increasing carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere

   Human activities are depleting atmospheric ozone

An ecosystem consists of all the organisms living in a community as well as all the abiotic factors with which they interact. As with populations and communities, the boundaries of ecosystems are usually not discrete. Ecosystems can range from a microcosm, such as the terrarium you see here, to lakes and forests. Many ecologists regard the entire biosphere as a global ecosystem, a composite of all the local ecosystems on Earth. The biosphere, or whole-earth ecosystem, is the most inclusive level in the hierarchy of biological organization (seeFIGURE 1.2).

The dynamics of an ecosystem involve two processes that cannot be fully described at lower organizational levels: energy flow and chemical cycling. Energy enters most ecosystems in the form of sunlight. It is then converted to chemical energy by autotrophic organisms, passed to heterotrophs in the organic compounds of food, and dissipated in the form of heat. Chemical elements such as carbon and nitrogen are cycled between abiotic and biotic components of the ecosystem. Photosynthetic organisms assimilate these elements in inorganic form from the air, soil, and water and incorporate them into organic molecules, some of which are consumed by animals. The elements are returned in inorganic form to the air, soil, and water by the metabolism of plants and animals and by other organisms, such as bacteria and fungi, that break down organic wastes and dead organisms. The movements of energy and matter through ecosystems are related because both occur by the transfer of substances through photosynthesis and feeding relationships. However, because energy, unlike matter, cannot be recycled, an ecosystem must be powered by a continuous influx of new energy from an external source (the sun). Energy flows through ecosystems, while matter cycles within them.

This chapter describes the dynamics of energy flow and chemical cycling in ecosystems and considers some of the consequences of human intrusions into these processes.




