
 Seedless vascular plants formed vast "coal forests" during the Carboniferous period

The phyla Lycophyta and Pterophyta represent the modern lineages of seedless vascular plants that formed forests during the Carboniferous period about 290-360 million years ago (FIGURE 29.25). Seedless vascular plants of the Carboniferous forests left not only living relicts and fossils, but also fossil fuel in the form of coal.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 29-25. Artist's conception of a Carboniferous forest based on fossil evidence. Most of the large trees with straight trunks are lycophytes. On the left, the tree with numerous feathery branches is a horsetail. Tree ferns, though not featured in this painting, were also abundant in the "coal forests" of the Carboniferous. Animals, including giant dragonflies like the one near the horsetail, also thrived.

Coal formed during several geologic periods, but the most extensive beds of coal are found in strata deposited during the Carboniferous, a time when most of the continents were flooded by shallow swamps. Europe and North America, located near the equator at that time, were covered by tropical swamp forests. Dead plants did not completely decay in the stagnant waters, and great depths of organic remains--peat--accumulated by a process similar to that occurring today in peat bogs. The swamps were later covered by the sea, and marine sediments piled up on top of the peat. Heat and pressure gradually converted the peat to coal, a "fossil fuel." Coal powered the Industrial Revolution, and some politicians advocate a resurgence in coal use as we continue to deplete oil and gas reserves. However, burning more coal will increase the industrial output of CO2 and other "greenhouse gases" that contribute to global warming (see Chapter 55). Energy conservation and the development of alternative (nonfossil fuel) energy sources seem like prudent options instead.

Growing along with the seedless plants in Carboniferous swamps were primitive seed plants. Though seed plants were not the dominant plants at that time, they rose to prominence after the swamps began to dry up at the end of the Carboniferous period. The next chapter traces the origin and diversification of seed plants, continuing our theme of terrestrial adaptation.




