
 The oral cavity, pharynx, and esophagus initiate food processing

The Oral Cavity

Both physical and chemical digestion of food begin in the mouth. During chewing, teeth of various shapes cut, smash, and grind food, making it easier to swallow and increasing its surface area. The presence of food in the oral cavity triggers a nervous reflex that causes the salivary glands to deliver saliva through ducts to the oral cavity. Even before food is actually in the mouth, salivation may occur in anticipation because of learned associations between eating and the time of day, cooking odors, or other stimuli. In humans, more than a liter of saliva is secreted each day.

Saliva contains a slippery glycoprotein (carbohydrate-protein complex) called mucin, which protects the soft lining of the mouth from abrasion and lubricates the food for easier swallowing. Saliva also contains buffers that help prevent tooth decay by neutralizing acid in the mouth. Antibacterial agents in saliva kill many of the bacteria that enter the mouth with food.

Chemical digestion of carbohydrates, a main source of chemical energy, begins in the oral cavity. Saliva contains salivary amylase, an enzyme that hydrolyzes starch (a glucose polymer from plants) and glycogen (a glucose polymer from animals). The main products of this enzyme's action are smaller polysaccharides and the disaccharide maltose.

The tongue tastes food, manipulates it during chewing, and helps shape the food into a ball called a bolus. During swallowing, the tongue pushes a bolus to the back of the oral cavity and into the pharynx.

The Pharynx

The region we call our throat is the pharynx, a junction that opens to both the esophagus and the windpipe (trachea). When we swallow, the top of the windpipe moves up so that its opening, the glottis, is blocked by a cartilaginous flap, the epiglottis. You can see this motion in the bobbing of the "Adam's apple" during swallowing. This carefully controlled mechanism normally ensures that a bolus will be guided into the entrance of the esophagus (FIGURE 41.14, steps one and two). On rare occasions when food or liquids go "down the wrong pipe" because the swallowing reflex didn't close the opening of the windpipe in time, the blockage of airflow to the lungs can be fatal.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 41-14. From mouth to stomach: the swallowing reflex and esophageal peristalsis.

The Esophagus

The esophagus conducts food from the pharynx down to the stomach by peristalsis (FIGURE 41.14, step six). The muscles at the very top of the esophagus are striated (voluntary). Thus, the act of swallowing begins voluntarily, but then the involuntary waves of contraction by smooth muscles in the rest of the esophagus take over.




