
 The principle of parsimony helps systematists reconstruct phylogeny

We can use DNA sequence data to learn more about general systematic theory. After sequence alignment and the point-by-point comparisons of base sequences in homologous DNA from a set of species, systematists may convert the data to phylogenetic trees. In making the sequence comparisons, each base change--say, a point mutation that changes a G to an A--counts as one evolutionary event. Challenged with many such base changes throughout a set of species, a systematist has quite a phylogenetic puzzle to solve. If there are only a few species in the set, then the number of ways to construct a phylogenetic tree based on the DNA sequence data is not too large (FIGURE 25.14, p. 500). But let's say a systematist is trying to construct a phylogeny for 50 species. About 3 &#160;X&#160; 1076 trees are possible for a 50-species problem! Even a supercomputer would take too long to search for the tree that best fits the DNA data. But for more manageable data sets, systematists can screen the tree variations by using a principle called parsimony.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 25-14. Simplified version of a four-species problem in phylogenetics. Here are just three of the many possible trees we can draw for the phylogeny of four closely related species of birds.

Applied to science, the principle of parsimony states that a theory about nature should be the simplest explanation that is consistent with the facts. In other words, "keep it simple." The parsimony principle is sometimes called "Occam's Razor," in honor of William of Occam, a 14th-century English philosopher who is held to have advocated this minimalist approach to problem solving. (The "razor" refers to the shaving off of unneeded complications.) Six centuries later, the philosopher Bertrand Russell reinforced the principle of parsimony with these words: "It is vain to do with more what can be done with fewer."

Systematists apply the principle of parsimony to construct phylogenetic trees that represent the smallest number of evolutionary changes. In the case of cladograms based on morphological characters, the most parsimonious tree is the one that requires the fewest evolutionary events in the form of shared derived characters. FIGURE 25.15 (pp. 500-501) walks you through the construction of the most parsimonious tree based on DNA sequence data for the relatively simple case of the four-species problem introduced in FIGURE 25.14. For species sets much larger, we would need a computer to serve as an electronic razor to shave away all the possible trees that are unnecessarily complicated in our quest for parsimony.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 25-15. Parsimony and molecular systematics. Follow the steps to search for the most parsimonious tree representing the phylogeny of the four species introduced in FIGURE 25.14. (We are evaluating only three of the possible trees.)




