
 Sensory receptors are categorized by the type of energy they transduce

Based on the type of energy they detect (transduce), sensory receptors fall into five categories: mechanoreceptors, pain receptors, thermoreceptors, chemoreceptors, and electromagnetic receptors. One amazing feature of many of these receptors is that they can detect the smallest physical unit of stimulus possible. Most photoreceptors can detect a single quantum (photon) of light, chemoreceptors can detect a single molecule or odorant, and the mechanoreceptor cells of our inner ear can detect a motion of only a few angstroms.

Mechanoreceptors are stimulated by physical deformation caused by such stimuli as pressure, touch, stretch, motion, and sound--all forms of mechanical energy. Bending or stretching of the plasma membrane of a mechanoreceptor cell increases its permeability to both sodium and potassium ions, resulting in a depolarization (receptor potential).

The human sense of touch relies on mechanoreceptors that are actually modified dendrites of sensory neurons (FIGURE 49.3). Receptors that detect light touch are close to the surface of the skin; they transduce very slight inputs of mechanical energy into receptor potentials. Receptors responding to strong pressure and vibrations in the body are in deep skin layers. Other touch receptors detect hair movement--the sensitivity of a cat's whiskers is an example.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 49-3. Sensory receptors in human skin. Each mechanoreceptor is a modified dendrite of a sensory neuron. Most receptors in the inner layer of the skin (dermis) are encapsulated by one or more layers of connective tissue. Those in the outer skin layers (epidermis) and touch receptors wound around the base of hairs are naked dendrites. Touch receptors at the base of the stout whiskers of mammals such as cats and many rodents are extremely sensitive and enable the animal to detect nearby objects in the dark.

An example of an interoreceptor stimulated by mechanical distortion is the muscle spindle, or stretch receptor (see FIGURE 48.3). This mechanoreceptor monitors the length of skeletal muscles. The muscle spindle contains modified muscle fibers attached to sensory neurons and runs parallel to muscle. When the muscle is stretched, the fibers of the spindle are also stretched, depolarizing the sensory neurons and triggering action potentials that are transmitted back to the spinal cord.

The hair cell is a common type of mechanoreceptor that detects motion. Hair cells are found in the vertebrate ear and in the lateral line organs of fishes and amphibians, where they detect movement relative to the environment (see FIGURE 34.12a). The "hairs" are either specialized cilia or microvilli. They project upward from the surface of the hair cell into either an internal compartment, such as the human inner ear, or an external environment, such as a pond. When the cilia or microvilli bend in one direction, they stretch the hair cell membrane and increase its permeability to sodium and potassium ions, leading to an increase in the rate of impulse production in a sensory neuron. When the cilia bend in the opposite direction, ion permeability decreases, reducing the number of action potentials in the sensory neuron. This specificity allows hair cells to respond to the direction of motion as well as to its strength and speed (FIGURE 49.4).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 49-4. Mechanoreception by a hair cell. The "hairs" are either cilia or cellular extensions called microvilli.

Pain receptors in humans are a class of naked dendrites in the epidermis of the skin called nociceptors (see FIGURE 49.3). Most animals probably experience pain, although we cannot say what perceptions other animals actually associate with stimulation of their pain receptors. Pain is one of the most important sensations because the stimulus becomes translated into a defensive reaction, such as withdrawal from danger. Rare individuals who are born without any pain sensation may die from such conditions as a ruptured appendix because they cannot feel the associated pain and are unaware of the danger.

Different groups of pain receptors respond to excess heat, pressure, or specific classes of chemicals released from damaged or inflamed tissues. Some of the chemicals that trigger pain include histamine and acids. Prostaglandins increase pain by sensitizing the receptors--that is, lowering their threshold (see Chapter 45 to review prostaglandins). Aspirin and ibuprofen reduce pain by inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis.

Thermoreceptors, responding to either heat or cold, help regulate body temperature by signaling both surface and body core temperature. There is still debate about the identity of thermoreceptors in the mammalian skin. Possible candidates are two receptors consisting of encapsulated, branched dendrites (see FIGURE 49.3). Many researchers, however, believe that these structures are actually modified pressure receptors and maintain that naked dendrites of certain sensory neurons are the actual thermoreceptors in the skin. There is general agreement that cold and heat receptors in the skin, as well as interothermoreceptors in the anterior hypothalamus of the brain, send information to the body's thermostat, located in the posterior hypothalamus.

Chemoreceptors include both general receptors that transmit information about the total solute concentration in a solution and specific receptors that respond to individual kinds of molecules. Osmoreceptors in the mammalian brain, for example, are general receptors that detect changes in the total solute concentration of the blood and stimulate thirst when osmolarity increases (see Chapter 44). Water receptors in the feet of house flies respond to pure water or to a dilute solution of virtually any substance. Most animals also have receptors specific to important molecules, including glucose, oxygen, carbon dioxide, and amino acids. In all these examples, the stimulus molecule binds to a specific site on the membrane of the receptor cell and initiates changes in membrane permeability. Two other groups of chemoreceptors show intermediate specificity. Gustatory (taste) and olfactory (smell) receptors respond to categories of related chemicals. In taste, humans often classify such general categories as sweet, sour, salty, or bitter. Two of the most sensitive and specific chemoreceptors known are present in the antennae of the male silkworm moth (FIGURE 49.5). They detect the two chemical components of the female moth sex pheromone.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 49-5. Chemoreceptors in an insect. (a) The antennae of the male silkworm moth Bombyx mori are covered with sensory hairs, visible in (b) the SEM enlargement. The hairs have chemoreceptors that are highly sensitive to the sex pheromone released by the female.

Electromagnetic receptors detect various forms of electromagnetic energy, such as visible light, electricity, and magnetism. Photoreceptors, which detect the radiation we know as visible light, are often organized into eyes. Snakes have extremely sensitive infrared receptors that detect the body heat of prey standing out against a colder background (FIGURE 49.6a). Some fishes discharge electric currents and use special electroreceptors to locate objects, such as prey, that disturb the electric currents. The platypus, a monotreme mammal, has electroreceptors on its bill that can probably detect electrical fields generated by the muscles of prey, such as crustaceans, frogs, and small fishes. There is also evidence that many animals that home or migrate use the magnetic field lines of Earth to help orient themselves (FIGURE 49.6b). The iron-containing mineral magnetite is found in the skulls of some birds and mammals (including humans), in the abdomens of bees, in the teeth of some mollusks, and in certain protists and prokaryotes that orient with respect to Earth's magnetic field. Once used by sailors as a primitive compass, magnetite may be part of an important orienting mechanism in many animals.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 49-6. Specialized electromagnetic receptors. (b) Some migrating animals, such as the beluga whales in this aerial photograph, can apparently sense Earth's magnetic field and use the information, along with other cues, for orientation.

In the next few sections, we'll apply our overview of sensory receptors as we take a closer look at specific senses, such as sight and hearing.




