
 The Hardy-Weinberg theorem describes a nonevolving population

Before we consider the mechanisms that cause a population to evolve, it will be helpful to examine, for comparison, the gene pool of a nonevolving population. Such a gene pool is described by the Hardy-Weinberg theorem, named for the two scientists who derived the principle independently in 1908. The theorem states that the frequencies of alleles and genotypes in a population's gene pool remain constant over the generations unless acted upon by agents other than Mendelian segregation and recombination of alleles. Put another way, the shuffling of alleles due to meiosis and random fertilization has no effect on the overall gene pool of a population.

To apply the Hardy-Weinberg theorem, let's return to our imaginary wildflower population of 500 plants (FIGURE 23.3a, p. 448). Recall that 80%  (0.8) of the flower-color loci in the gene pool have the R allele and 20%  (0.2) have the r allele. How will meiosis during sexual reproduction affect the frequencies of the two alleles in the next generation of our wildflower population? We will assume that the union of sperm and ova in the population is completely random; that is, all male-female mating combinations are equally likely. The situation is analogous to mixing all gametes in a sack and then drawing them randomly, two at a time, to determine the genotype for each zygote (fertilized egg). Each gamete has one allele for flower color, and the allele frequencies of the gametes will be the same as the allele frequencies in the parent population. Every time a gamete is drawn from the pool at random, the chance that the gamete will bear an R allele is 0.8, and the chance that the gamete will have an r allele is 0.2.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 23-3. The Hardy-Weinberg theorem. The gene pool of a nonevolving population remains constant over the generations; Mendelian segregation alone will not alter the relative frequencies of alleles or genotypes. In this example (a hypothetical flower population), note that the frequencies of alleles and genotypes remain the same between one generation (a) and the next generation (b).

Using the rule of multiplication (see Chapter 14), we can cal culate the frequencies of the three possible genotypes in the next generation of the population (FIGURE 23.3b). The probability of picking two R alleles from the pool of gametes is 0.8 &#160;X&#160; 0.8 = 0.64. Thus, about 64%  of the plants in the next generation will have the genotype RR. The frequency of rr individuals will be about 0.04 (0.2 &#160;X&#160; 0.2 = 0.04), or 4% . And 32% , or 0.32, of the plants will be heterozygous--that is, Rr or rR, depending on whether it is the sperm or ovum that supplies the dominant allele (frequency of Rr = 0.8 &#160;X&#160; 0.2 = 0.16; frequency of rR = 0.2 &#160;X&#160; 0.8 = 0.16; frequency of Rr + rR = 0.32).

Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium

Notice in FIGURE 23.3 that the sexual processes of meiosis and random fertilization have maintained the same allele and genotype frequencies that existed in the previous generation of the wildflower population. For the flower-color locus, the population's gene pool is in a state of equilibrium--referred to as Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Theoretically, the allele frequencies could remain constant at 0.8 for R and 0.2 for r forever (though in reality, some other factor always intervenes). The Hardy-Weinberg theorem describes how the Mendelian system has no tendency to alter allele frequencies. For instance, the dominant allele (R) has no tendency to increase in frequency from one generation to the next relative to the recessive allele (r). The system operates somewhat like shuffling a deck of cards: No matter how many times the deck is reshuffled to deal out new hands, the deck itself remains the same. Aces do not grow more numerous than jacks. And the repeated shuffling of a population's gene pool over the generations cannot, in itself, increase the frequency of one allele relative to another.

The Hardy-Weinberg Equation

We can use our imaginary wildflower population to describe the Hardy-Weinberg theorem in more general terms. We will restrict our analysis to the simplest case of only two alleles, one dominant over the other. However, the Hardy-Weinberg theorem also applies to situations in which there are three or more alleles for a particular locus and no clear-cut dominance.

For a gene locus where only two alleles occur in a population, population geneticists use the letter p to represent the frequency of one allele and the letter q to represent the frequency of the other allele. In our imaginary wildflower population, p = 0.8 and q = 0.2 (see FIGURE 23.3). Note that p + q = 1; the combined frequencies of all possible alleles must add to 100%  for that locus in the population. If there are only two alleles and we know the frequency of one, the frequency of the other can be calculated:

If p + q = 1 then p = 1 - q and q = 1 - p

When gametes combine their alleles to form zygotes, the probability of generating an RR genotype is p2 (an application of the rule of multiplication). In our wildflower population, p = 0.8, and p = 0.64, the probability of an R sperm fertilizing an R ovum to produce an RR zygote. The frequency of individuals homozygous for the other allele (rr) is q2, or 0.2 &#160;X&#160; 0.2 = 0.04 for the wildflower population. There are two ways in which an Rr genotype can arise, depending on which parent contributes the dominant allele. Therefore, the frequency of heterozygous individuals in the population is 2pq (2 &#160;X&#160; 0.8 &#160;X&#160; 0.2 = 0.32 in our example). If we have included all possible genotypes, the genotype frequencies add up to 1:

p2+2pq+q2=1Frequency of RR genotypeFrequency of Rr plus rR genotypeFrequency of rr genotypeFor our wildflowers, this is 0.64+0.32+0.04=1.

Population geneticists refer to this general formula as the Hardy-Weinberg equation. The equation enables us to calculate frequencies of alleles in a gene pool if we know frequencies of genotypes, and vice versa.

Population Genetics and Health Science

We can use the Hardy-Weinberg equation to estimate the percentage of the human population that carries the allele for a particular inherited disease. For instance, one out of approximately 10,000 babies in the United States is born with phenylketonuria (PKU), a metabolic disorder that, left untreated, results in mental retardation and other problems. (Newborn babies are now routinely tested for PKU, and symptoms can be prevented by following a strict diet.) The disease is caused by a recessive allele; thus, the frequency of individuals in the U.S. population born with PKU corresponds to q2 in the Hardy-Weinberg equation (q2 = frequency of the homozygous recessive genotype). Given one PKU occurrence per 10,000 births, q2 = 0.0001. Therefore, assuming Hardy-Weinberg proportions, the frequency of the recessive allele for PKU in the population is  and the frequency of the dominant allele is  The frequency of carriers, heterozygous people who do not have PKU but may pass the PKU allele on to offspring, is  Thus, about 2%  of the U.S. population carries the PKU allele.

The Hardy-Weinberg Theorem and Genetic Variation

The Hardy-Weinberg theorem is important conceptually and historically because it shows how Mendel's theory of inheritance plugs a hole in Darwin's theory of natural selection. Natural selection requires genetic variation; it cannot act in a genetically uniform population. The Hardy-Weinberg theorem explains how Mendelian inheritance preserves genetic variation from one generation to the next. Pre-Mendelian theories of inheritance were mainly "blending" theories, in which the hereditary factors in the offspring were thought to be a blend of the hereditary factors inherited from the two parents. If a red flower mates with a white one, blending theory predicts that the offspring will be a paler red and will now have hereditary factors for this paler red color. Genetic variation has been eliminated, since the two kinds of factors in the parents have been reduced to only one kind in the offspring. Such a hereditary mechanism would soon produce a uniform population. In Mendelian inheritance, however, the hereditary mechanism has no tendency by itself to reduce genetic variation. The set of alleles inherited by each generation from its parents are in turn passed on when that generation breeds. This nonblending mechanism of inheritance preserves the genetic variation upon which natural selection acts.

The Assumptions of the Hardy-Weinberg Theorem

For a population to be in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, it must satisfy five main conditions:

Very large population size. In a population of finite size, especially if that size is small, genetic drift, which is chance fluctuation in the gene pool, can cause genotype frequencies to change over time.

No migration. Gene flow, the transfer of alleles between populations due to the movement of individuals or gametes, can increase the frequency of any genotype that is in high frequency among the immigrants.

No net mutations. By changing one allele into another, mutations alter the gene pool.

Random mating. If individuals pick mates with certain genotypes, then the random mixing of gametes required for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium does not occur.

No natural selection. Differential survival and reproductive success of genotypes will alter their frequencies and may cause a detectable deviation from frequencies predicted by the Hardy-Weinberg equation.



Thus, we do not really expect a natural population to be in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. And a deviation from the stability of a gene pool--and from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium--usually results in evolution.




