
 Most chemical signals bind to plasma-membrane proteins, initiating signal-transduction pathways

As we discussed in Chapter 11, a signal molecule has a specific shape that can be recognized by that signal's target cells. Reception of the signal occurs when the signal molecule binds to a specific receptor protein, which is either built into the plasma membrane of the target cell or located inside the target cell (FIGURE 45.3). The binding of a signal molecule to a receptor protein triggers events within the target cell--signal transduction--that result in a response, a change in the cell's behavior. Cells are unresponsive to a signal if they lack the appropriate receptors. How a chemical signal brings about changes in target cells depends on whether it binds to a receptor on the target cell's surface or inside the cell.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 45-3. Mechanisms of chemical signaling: a review. A chemical signal secreted by a cell either (a) binds to a receptor protein on the surface of a target cell, triggering a signal-transduction pathway, or (b) penetrates the target cell's plasma membrane and binds to a receptor inside the cell. When signal is bound to an intracellular receptor, the receptor acts as a transcription factor, causing a change in gene expression. The binding of signal to a surface receptor can lead to either a change in gene expression or a change in a cytoplasmic activity.

Almost all local regulators and a majority of hormones have plasma-membrane receptors (see FIGURE 45.3a). Chapter 11 discussed the discovery that the hormone epinephrine exerts its effects via membrane receptors. Another dramatic example of the role of membrane receptors involves changes in frog skin color, an adaptation that helps camouflage the frog as lighting changes. The darkness of the skin varies with the organelle arrangement within melanocytes, skin cells that contain the dark brown pigment melanin in cytoplasmic organelles called melanosomes. The frog's skin appears light when the melanosomes are clustered tightly around the cell nuclei and darker when the melanosomes spread throughout the cytoplasm. The arrangement of melanosomes is controlled by a peptide hormone called melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH), secreted by the pituitary gland. When MSH is added to the interstitial fluid surrounding the pigment-containing cells, the melanosomes disperse. However, direct microinjection of MSH into individual melanocytes does not induce melanosome dispersion--evidence that interaction between the hormone and a surface receptor is required for hormone action.

A signal receptor located in the plasma membrane is generally the first component of a signal-transduction pathway, a series of molecular changes that converts an extracellular chemical signal to a specific intracellular response. You may wish to review the molecules and mechanisms of cell signaling in Chapter 11. Depending on the signal molecule and the molecules present in a target cell, a signal-transduction pathway may lead to responses in either the cytoplasm (the activation of an enzyme, for instance) or the nucleus (usually involving the regulation of specific genes). And because different types of cells have different collections of molecules (especially proteins), the same signal can bring about different responses in different target cells (FIGURE 45.4). Hormones are especially potent regulators, effective in minute amounts, and signal-transduction pathways can trigger elaborate enzyme cascades that amplify the hormonal signal (see FIGURE 11.16).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 45-4. One chemical signal, different effects. A single type of signal molecule, in this case a neurotransmitter called acetylcholine, can produce different responses in different target cells. Different responses may result because the receptors are different [compare (a) with (b) and (c)] or because signal-transduction pathways within the target cells are different (see also FIGURE 11.18).




