
 Photosynthesis evolved early in prokaryotic life

All forms of nutrition and nearly all metabolic pathways evolved among prokaryotes before there were any eukaryotes. As early prokaryotes evolved, they were met with constantly changing physical and biological environments. In response to these changes, new metabolic capabilities evolved that in turn changed the environment faced by the next community of prokaryotes. All the major metabolic capabilities seen among prokaryotes (and hence among eukaryotes) probably evolved in the first billion years of life. And during this expansion of metabolic diver sity, photosynthesis evolved relatively early--a hypothesis supported by molecular systematics, comparisons of energy me tabolism among extant prokaryotes, and geologic evidence.

The energy metabolism of even the simplest photoauto trophs is relatively complex. Thus, it seems reasonable to postulate that the very first prokaryotes were heterotrophs that obtained their energy and carbon skeletons from the pool of organic molecules available in the "primordial soup" of early Earth (see Chapter 26). Glycolysis, which can extract energy from organic fuels to generate ATP in anaerobic environments, was probably one of the first metabolic pathways. That would account for the existence of glycolysis in almost every group of modern organisms. As heterotrophs depleted the supply of organic nutrients in the environment, natu ral selection would have favored any prokaryotes that could harness the energy of sunlight to drive the synthesis of ATP and generate reducing power to synthesize organic compounds from CO2.

What evidence is there for an early evolution of photosynthesis? First, photosynthetic groups are scattered among diverse branches of prokaryote phylogeny. It is possible that photosynthesis evolved independently many times in various prokaryotic lineages (FIGURE 27.12a). This seems unlikely, however, since the molecular machinery required for photosynthesis is very complex. Applying the principle of parsimony we dis cussed in Chapter 25, the most reasonable hypothesis is that photosynthesis originated once in an ancestor common to the diverse prokaryotic groups where we find photosynthesis today. The heterotrophic groups that are closely related to photosynthetic ones could represent a loss of photosynthetic ability during evolution (FIGURE 27.12b). This would explain molecular data suggesting that in nutritionally diverse taxa of prokaryotes, the autotrophic species are generally older lineages than the heterotrophic ones. Although the very first organisms may have been heterotrophs from which autotrophs evolved, the diversity of heterotrophs we observe today probably descended secondarily from photosynthetic ancestors.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 27-12. Contrasting hypotheses for the taxonomic distribution of photosynthesis among prokaryotes.

Further evidence for an early origin of photosynthesis is the antiquity of cyanobacteria. These are the only autotrophic prokaryotes that release O2 by splitting water during their light reactions. The geologic evidence for accumulation of atmospheric oxygen beginning at least 2.7 billion years ago suggests that cyanobacteria were already a major part of the biosphere by then. And fossils of prokaryotes that look very much like modern cyanobacteria have been found in stromatolites as old as 3.5 billion years, pushing the possible origin of oxygenic photosynthesis back considerably further.

Oxygenic photosynthesis is especially complex because it requires two cooperative photosystems (see FIGURE 10.12). Some groups of modern prokaryotes perform a simpler mode of photosynthesis, using a single photosystem to extract electrons from compounds such as H2S instead of splitting water. But certain components of the photosynthetic machinery are common to such nonoxygenic photosynthesis and the oxygenic version in cyanobacteria. A logical inference is that cyanobacteria evolved from ancestors with simpler, nonoxygenic photosynthesis. This would push the origin of photosynthesis back very close to our earliest fossil evidence of life.

The evolution of cyanobacteria changed the Earth in a radical way, gradually transforming its atmosphere from a reducing one to an oxidizing one. In Chapter 25, we discussed how the oxygen revolution posed an environmental crisis for life, which originated in a mostly anaerobic world. The most elegant adaptation to the changing atmosphere was the evolution of cellular respiration, which uses the oxidizing power of O2 to increase the efficiency of fuel consumption. Photosynthesis and cellular respiration are actually closely related, both using electron transport chains to generate proton gradients that power ATP synthase machines (see FIGURE 10.15). Given the early origin of photosynthesis, it is likely that cellular respiration evolved by modification of the photosynthetic equipment for a new function.

Now that we have applied this book's theme of evolution to the origin of metabolic diversity in prokaryotes, let's survey the diverse groups of archaea and bacteria that continue to have enormous impact on Earth and its life.




