
 The study of consciousness poses a unique challenge for scientists

A simple but profound question is whether nonhuman animals are consciously aware of themselves and of the world around them. An equally profound question is whether the study of consciousness (awareness) is within the purview of science.

Many people who have spent a lot of time with pets or wild animals argue that these animals are not behaving like sophisticated robots. But is a dog aware of itself when it is chasing a Frisbee? Do animals "feel" pleasure or sadness as we do? To date, we have no way of answering such questions directly, because conscious awareness is known only to the individual that experiences it, and unlike phenomena that can be studied objectively, it is not associated with any observable behavioral or physiological change.

Donald Griffin, of Princeton University, is a foremost proponent of the view that conscious thinking is an inherent and essential part of the behavior of many nonhuman animals. Griffin argues that if other animals behave in ways we associate with conscious processing in ourselves, perhaps it makes sense to assume that they have the same underlying awareness. In her famous field studies, Jane Goodall has described cognitive decision making in chimpanzees. Griffin suggests that such abilities may extend to many nonprimate branches of the phylogenetic tree as well. He argues, for example, that conscious processes are at the heart of such behaviors as the injury-feigning "strategy" of some species of ground-nesting birds (FIGURE 51.17).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 51-17. Injury-feigning display. This killdeer uses deception to defend her nest against predators or human disturbance. When danger threatens, she leaves the nest, which is usually concealed, and begins an elaborate display as though she has a broken wing. This behavior has the effect of leading the potential predator away from the nest. As the predator gets close to her, she simply flies away. She returns to the nest only after the danger has passed. Killdeers show extraordinary individual variation in the form and use of this display. In addition, individual killdeers use multiple variations of the display, depending on the type of threat to the nest and whether or not they have experienced the threat before. Some cognitive ethologists point to versatile behavior such as this to support the hypothesis that nonhuman animals are conscious, thinking beings.

Because of the difficulty of scientifically testing questions about consciousness, some researchers assume the most conservative position--that most animals are not aware. There are, of course, intermediate positions within the argument, and no behavioral biologist would argue that all animals behave in ways that indicate consciousness. Moreover, other animals may lack the ability to consciously integrate information (to "think") to the same extent as humans do, but is this a matter of degree--a continuum of abilities--or are humans fundamentally different in some behavioral respect? Ultimately, the answers we find about animal consciousness may profoundly affect how we interact with other animals--and how we view ourselves as well.




