
 Both genes and environment affect plant structure

In their long evolutionary journey from water onto land, plants became adapted by natural selection to the specific problems posed by terrestrial environments (see Chapters 29 and 30). A plant's structure reflects interactions with the environment on two time scales. Over the long term, entire plant species have, by natural selection, accumulated morphological adaptations that enhance survival and reproductive success in the environments in which they grow. For example, some desert plants, such as cacti, have leaves that are so highly reduced that the stem is actually the primary photosynthetic organ. This reduction in leaf size, and thus in surface area, is a morphological adaptation that reduces water loss. Over the short term, individual plants, far more than individual animals, exhibit structural responses to their specific environment. For example, look at how submersion in water affects leaf development in Cabomba, the aquatic plant illustrated in the opening illustration of this chapter. Those leaves that developed while the plant was submerged have a feathery appearance--a morphological adaptation that enhances photosynthesis by increasing the surface area of the leaf for the uptake of bicarbonate (HCO3-), the form in which CO2 occurs in water. In contrast, those leaves that develop when the growing plant reaches the surface are oval pads that aid in flotation (leaves to right of flower). The architecture of a plant is a dynamic process, continuously shaped by the plant's genetically directed growth pattern along with fine-tuning to the environment. In contrast, animal form is much less adjustable.

Even faster than a plant's structural responses to environmental changes are its physiological (functional) adjustments. Unlike cacti, most plants are rarely exposed to severe drought conditions and rely mainly on physiological adaptations to cope with drought stress. In the most common response, the plant produces a hormone that causes the stomata, the pores in the leaves through which most water is lost, to close. In our study of such responses, remember that structure and function are closely related. For example, we cannot understand the function of stomata unless we also examine the structure of the guard cells that border these pores.




