
 Symbiotic microorganisms help nourish many vertebrates

Herbivorous animals face a special challenge: much of the chemical energy in their diets is contained in the cellulose of plant cell walls, but animals do not produce enzymes that hydrolyze cellulose. Many vertebrates (as well as termites, whose wood diets are largely cellulose) solve this problem by housing large populations of symbiotic bacteria and protists in special fermetation chambers in their alimentary canals. These microorganisms do have enzymes that can digest cellulose to simple sugars and other compounds that the animal can absorb. In many cases the microorganisms can also use the sugars from digested cellulose along with minerals to make a variety of nutrients essential to the animal, such as vitamins and amino acids.

The location of symbiotic microbes in herbivores' digestive tracts varies depending on the type of animal. The hoatzin, an herbivorous bird that lives in South American rain forests, has a large, muscular crop (an esophageal pouch) that houses symbiotic microorganisms. Hard ridges in the wall of the crop grind plant leaves into small fragments, and the microorganisms break down cellulose. Many herbivorous mammals, including horses, house symbiotic microorganisms in a large cecum, the pouch where the small and large intestines connect. The symbiotic bacteria of rabbits and some rodents live in the large intestine as well as in the cecum. Since most nutrients are absorbed in the small intestine, nourishing by-products of fermentation by bacteria in the large intestine are initially lost with the feces. Rabbits and rodents recover these nutrients by eating some of their feces and passing the food through the alimentary canal a second time. (The familiar rabbit "pellets," which are not reingested, are the feces eliminated after food has passed through the digestive tract twice.) The koala, an Australian marsupial, also has an enlarged cecum, where symbiotic bacteria ferment finely shredded eucalyptus leaves (see FIGURE 41.21). The most elaborate adaptations for a herbivorous diet have evolved in the ruminants, which include deer, cattle, and sheep (FIGURE 41.22).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 41-22. Ruminant digestion. The stomach of a ruminant has four chambers. Because of the microbial action in the chambers, the diet from which a ruminant actually absorbs its nutrients is much richer than the grass the animal originally ate. In fact, a ruminant eating grass or hay obtains many of its nutrients by digesting the symbiotic microorganisms, which reproduce rapidly enough in the rumen to maintain a stable population.

Our focus in this chapter has been on provisioning the animal body to support both metabolic production of ATP and biosynthesis. We have examined the nutritional requirements of animals and some of the many ways animals obtain nutrients for fuel and building materials. In the next chapter we will see that obtaining food, digesting it, and absorbing nutrients are only parts of a larger story. Provisioning the body also involves distributing nutrients to cells throughout the body and exchanging respiratory gases with the environment.




