
 Species with internal fertilization usually produce fewer zygotes but provide more parental protection than species with external fertilization

All species produce more offspring than survive to reproduce. Species with external fertilization usually produce enormous numbers of zygotes, but the proportion that survive and develop further is often quite small. Internal fertilization usually produces fewer zygotes, but this may be offset by greater protection of the embryos and parental care of the young. Major types of protection include resistant eggshells, development of the embryo within the reproductive tract of the female parent, and parental care of the eggs and offspring.

Many species of terrestrial animals produce eggs that can withstand harsh environments. Birds, reptiles, and monotremes have amniote eggs with calcium and protein shells that resist water loss and physical damage. By contrast, the eggs of fishes and amphibians have only a gelatinous coat.

Rather than secreting a protective shell around the egg, many animals retain the embryo, which develops within the female reproductive tract. Among mammals, marsupials such as kangaroos and opossums retain their embryos for a short period in the uterus; the embryos then crawl out and complete fetal development attached to a mammary gland in the mother's pouch. The embryos of eutherian (placental) mammals develop entirely within the uterus, being nourished by the mother's blood supply through a special organ, the placenta (discussed in Chapter 34 and later in this chapter).

When a kangaroo crawls out of its mother's pouch for the first time, or when a human is born, it still is not capable of independent existence. We are familiar with adult birds feeding their young and mammals nursing their offspring, but parental care is much more widespread than we might suspect, and it takes a variety of unusual forms. In one species of tropical frog, for instance, the male carries the tadpoles in his stomach until they metamorphose and hop out as young frogs. There are also many cases of parental care among invertebrates (FIGURE 46.5).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 46-5. Parental care in an invertebrate. Compared to many insects, giant water bugs (Belostoma) produce relatively few offspring, but parental protection enhances the survival of those offspring. Fertilization is internal, and the female glues her fertilized eggs to the back of the male (shown here). Whereas the males of most insect species provide no parental care for their offspring, the male giant water bug carries them for days, frequently fanning water over them. This treatment helps keep the eggs moist, aerated, and free of parasites.




