
 Negative feedback prevents unlimited population growth

No population stops growing without some type of negative feedback between population density and the vital rates of birth and death. Once we know how birth and death rates change with population density, we need to determine the mechanisms causing these changes. Because populations are affected by a variety of factors that cause negative feedback, it can be a challenge to pinpoint the exact factors at work in a particular population.

Although field studies may eventually shed light on the most important factors producing negative feedback in specific cases, they have not yet provided many generalizations. First, much of the research on populations has been conducted in the temperate zone, and we need many more studies of tropical and polar organisms to complete the picture. Second, birds and mammals have been the subjects of much more research than have other organisms. In particular, insects, which form the dominant group of species on Earth, have not been studied in proportion to their species' richness. Finally, long time periods are required for experimental work on population dynamics, with definitive studies routinely taking 10 to 20 years for completion. With these reservations in mind, let us look at several examples of how birth and death rates change with population density--in some cases where the mechanisms behind these changes are well understood.

Resource limitation in crowded populations can stop population growth by reducing reproduction. For example, crowding can reduce seed production by plants (FIGURE 52.14a). And available food supplies often limit the reproductive output of songbirds; as bird population density increases in a particular habitat, each female lays fewer eggs, a density-dependent response (FIGURE 52.14b). In both of these examples, increasing population density intensifies intraspecific competition for declining nutrients, resulting in a lower birth rate.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 52-14. Decreased fecundity at high population densities.

Factors other than intraspecific competition for food or nutrients can also cause density-dependent behavior of populations. In many vertebrates and some invertebrates, territoriality, the defense of a well-bounded physical space, may set a limit on density, so that the space that constitutes the territory becomes the resource for which individuals compete. For oceanic birds such as gannets, which nest on rocky islands where they are relatively safe from predators, the limited number of suitable nesting sites allows only a certain number of pairs to nest and reproduce. Up to a certain population size, most birds can find a suitable nest site, but few birds beyond that threshold breed successfully. Thus, the limiting resource that determines breeding population size for gannets is safe nesting space. As this space fills, birds that cannot obtain a nesting spot do not reproduce. Surplus, or nonbreeding, individuals are a good indication that territoriality is restricting population growth, as it does in many bird populations.

Population density also influences the health and thus the survival of organisms. Plants grown under crowded conditions tend to be smaller and less robust than those grown at lower densities. Small plants are less likely to survive, and those that do survive produce fewer flowers, fruit, and seeds. Gardeners who recognize this phenomenon thin their seed lings to produce the best possible yield. Animals, too, experience increased mortality at high population densities. In laboratory studies of flour beetles, for example, the percentage of eggs that hatch and survive to adulthood decreases steadily as density increases from moderate to high levels (FIGURE 52.15). The main cause of this density-dependent effect is cannibalism of eggs by adult beetles and large larvae.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 52-15. Decreased survivorship at high population densities. The percentage of flour beetles (Tribolium confusum) surviving from egg stage to adult in a laboratory culture decreases as density increases from moderate to high population densities, reducing the numbers of adults in the next generation.

Predation may also be an important cause of density- dependent mortality for some prey populations if a predator encounters and captures more food as the population density of the prey increases. Many predators, for example, exhibit switching behavior: They begin to concentrate on a particularly common species of prey when it becomes energetically efficient to do so (see the discussion of optimal foraging in Chapter 51). For example, trout may concentrate for a few days on a particular species of insect that is emerging from its aquatic larval stage, then switch as another insect species becomes more abundant. As a prey population builds up, predators may feed preferentially on that species, consuming a higher percentage of individuals; this can cause density- dependent regulation of the prey population.

The accumulation of toxic wastes is another component that can contribute to density-dependent regulation of population size. In laboratory cultures of small microorganisms, for example, metabolic by-products accumulate as the population grows, poisoning the population within this limited, artificial environment. Indeed, ethanol accumulates as a waste product when yeast ferments sugar. The alcohol content of wine is usually less than 13% , the maximum ethanol concentration that most wine-producing yeast cells can tolerate.

The impact of a disease on a population can be density dependent if the transmission rate of the disease depends on a certain level of crowding in the population. For example, tuberculosis strikes a greater percentage of people living in cities than in rural areas.

For some animal species, intrinsic factors, rather than the extrinsic factors just discussed, appear to regulate population size. White-footed mice in a small field enclosure will multiply from a few to a colony of 30 to 40 individuals, but eventually, reproduction will decline until the population ceases to grow. This drop in reproduction is associated with aggressive interactions that increase with population density, and it occurs even when food and shelter are provided in abundance. Although the exact mechanisms by which aggressive behavior affects reproductive rate are not yet understood, we do know that high population densities in mice induce a stress syndrome in which hormonal changes can delay sexual maturation, cause reproductive organs to shrink, and depress the immune system. In this case, high densities cause both an increase in mortality and a decrease in birth rates. Similar effects of crowding occur in wild populations of woodchucks and other rodents.

In these various examples of population regulation by negative feedback, we have seen how increased densities cause population growth rates to decline by affecting reproduction, growth, and survivorship in the individuals that make up the populations. This helps us answer our first question about populations: why all populations eventually stop increasing. Now let's turn to our second question: why certain habitats favor greater population densities.




