
 Like begets like, more or less: a comparison of asexual and sexual reproduction

Strictly speaking, "Like begets like" applies only to organisms that reproduce asexually. In asexual reproduction, a single individual is the sole parent and passes copies of all its genes to its offspring. For example, single-celled eukaryotic organisms can reproduce asexually by mitotic cell division, in which DNA is copied and allocated equally to two daughter cells. The genomes of the offspring are virtually exact copies of the parent's genome. Some multicellular organisms are also capable of reproducing asexually. Hydra, a relative of the jellyfishes, can reproduce by budding (FIGURE 13.1). Because the cells of the bud were derived by mitosis in the parent, the "chip off the old block" is usually genetically identical to its parent. Occasional genetic differences are due to relatively rare changes in the DNA called mutations, which we will discuss in Chapter 17. An individual that reproduces asexually gives rise to a clone, a group of genetically identical individuals.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 13-1. The asexual reproduction of a hydra. This relatively simple multicellular animal reproduces by budding. The bud, a localized mass of mitotically dividing cells, develops into a small hydra, which detaches from the parent (LM).

Sexual reproduction results in greater variation than does asexual reproduction; two parents give rise to offspring that have unique combinations of genes inherited from the two parents. In contrast to a clone, offspring of sexual reproduction vary genetically from their siblings and both parents: "Like begets like" only in the general sense of family resemblance. Genetic variation like that shown in FIGURE 13.2 (p. 236) is an important consequence of sexual reproduction. What mechanisms generate this genetic variation? The key is the behavior of chromosomes during the sexual life cycle.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 13-2. Two families. Two sets of parents make up the top row. Each couple has two children represented among the four photos in the bottom row, which are randomly arranged. (All individuals were photographed at about the same age; these are senior pictures from high school yearbooks.) Can you match the offspring with their parents? See the bottom of the page for the answers.*




