
 Animal form and function reflect biology's major themes

Animals provide vivid examples of biology's overarching theme of evolution. The adaptations we will observe in our comparative study of animals evolved by natural selection. The long, tonguelike proboscis of the hawk moth in the photo you see on this page is a structural adaptation for feeding. Recoiled when not in use, the proboscis extends as a straw through which the moth can suck nectar from deep within tube-shaped flowers.

A foraging hawk moth illustrates another major theme, one we introduced in Chapter 1: regulation. While natural selection provides a mechanism for long-term adaptation, organisms also have the capacity to adjust to environmental change over the short term by physiological responses (these short-term responses are themselves evolutionary adaptations). Many insects are inactive when it is cold. But Manduca sexta, the hawk moth species in our opening photo, can forage for nectar when air temperatures are as low as 5&#176;C. The moth uses a shivering-like mechanism for preflight warm-up of its muscles. Once the moth takes off, metabolic activity of its flight muscles generates heat, and a variety of regulatory adaptations maintain a temperature of about 30&#176;C in the muscles, even though the external temperature may be close to freezing. (You'll learn more about this regulation in Chapter 44.)

Searching for food, generating body heat and regulating internal temperature, sensing and responding to environmental stimuli, and all other animal activities require fuel in the form of chemical energy. Thus, we will apply concepts of bioenergetics--how organisms obtain, process, and use their energy resources--as another theme throughout our comparative study of animals.

And there's one more theme to guide our study of animals: the correlation of structure and function. Which is the better utensil: a spoon or a fork? The answer, of course, depends on what you are trying to eat. Given a choice of tools, you would not eat broth with a fork or a salad with a spoon. Form fits function. The same principle applies to life at its many levels, from molecules to organisms. Analyzing a biological structure such as a hawk moth's proboscis gives us clues about what it does and how it works. Conversely, knowing the function of a structure provides insight about its construction, such as the strawlike anatomy of Manduca's proboscis. Anatomy is the study of the structure of an organism; physiology is the study of the functions an organism performs. The distinction blurs when we apply the structure-function theme, and "anatomy-and-physiology" then rolls off the tongue as though it were one big compound noun. We could use the term functional anatomy instead. But here, our analogy to human inventions such as eating utensils breaks down. Without any sort of goal, natural selection can fit structure to function by selecting, over many generations, for what works best among the available options presented by a varying population. Thus, the form-function principle is just another extension of biology's central theme of evolution.




