
 Behavior and habitat selection contribute to the distribution of organisms

Some organisms do not occupy all their potential range, even though they are physically able to disperse into the unoccupied areas. In these cases, individuals seem to avoid certain habitats, even when the habitats are suitable. Thus, the distribution of a species may be limited by the behavior of individuals in selecting habitat. Habitat selection is typically thought of only with respect to animals, but plant species can also select their habitats, even though individual plants cannot move. How organisms select the type of habitat to occupy is one of the least understood ecological processes.

Insects often have very stereotyped oviposition (egg-depositing) behavior, and this may restrict their local distribution to certain host plants. Consider the European corn borer, for example, whose larvae will feed on a wide variety of plants but occur almost exclusively on corn because the ovipositing females are attracted by volatile odors produced by the corn plant. The complex chemical signaling between plants and herbivorous insects and pollinators is an important research area in the study of plant-herbivore interactions.

Anopheline mosquitoes are important carriers of disease, and their ecology has been studied extensively because of the difficulty of malaria eradication in tropical areas. Each mosquito species is usually associated with a particular type of breeding place, and one of the striking observations that a student of malaria first makes is that large areas of water in the tropics are completely free of dangerous mosquitoes. Habitat selection for oviposition sites by female mosquitoes appears to restrict their distribution. Larvae can develop successfully over a much wider range of conditions than those in which eggs are laid.

The key point in these examples is that evolution does not produce perfect organisms for every suitable habitat. Adaptation can never be exact and instantaneous, and we must be careful not to expect perfection in organisms (see Chapter 23). We may judge a tropical mosquito deficient for not laying eggs in all suitable rice field habitats, but this failing may only reflect the fact that rice fields are a recent habitat in evolutionary time. In addition, not all behavior that has evolved remains adaptive, particularly in ecosystems modified by humans. Environmental conditions may change such that behaviors that were formerly adaptive are now maladaptive. Ground-nesting birds on islands, for example, are threatened if new ground predators (rats, for example) colonize the island. Populations cannot evolve overnight. Even with suitable genetic variation in a population, natural selection may not be able to operate quickly enough to adjust habitat selection behavior to some abrupt environmental change.




