
 Male and female gametophytes develop within anthers and ovaries, respectively: Pollination brings them together

Development of the Male Gametophyte (Pollen Grain)

Within the sporangia (pollen sacs) of an anther are numerous diploid cells called microsporocytes. Each microsporocyte undergoes meiosis, forming four haploid microspores, each of which can eventually give rise to a haploid male gametophyte (FIGURE 38.4a).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 38-4. The development of angiosperm gametophytes (pollen and embryo sacs). (a) Pollen grains (immature male gametophytes) develop within the sporangia (pollen sacs) of anthers at the tips of stamens. The pollen grain becomes a mature male gametophyte when its generative cell divides to form two sperm. This usually occurs after a pollen grain lands on the stigma of a carpel and the pollen tube begins to grow (see FIGURE 38.1). (b) The embryo sac (female gametophyte) develops within an ovule, itself enclosed by the ovary at the base of a carpel. Within the ovule's sporangium is a large, diploid cell called the megasporocyte. The megasporocyte in this species divides by meiosis and gives rise to four haploid cells, but only one of these survives as the megaspore. (This contrasts with pollen formation, in which all four products of meiosis go on to form gametophytes.) Three mitotic divisions of the megaspore form the embryo sac, a multicellular female gametophyte. The ovule now consists of the embryo sac along with the surrounding integuments (protective tissues).

A microspore divides once by mitosis and produces two cells, a generative cell and a tube cell. The generative cell will eventually produce sperm. The tube cell, which encloses the generative cell, will produce the pollen tube, a structure essential for sperm delivery to the egg. The two-celled structure is encased in a thick, resistant wall that becomes sculptured into an elaborate pattern unique to the particular plant species (FIGURE 38.5). Together, the two cells and their wall constitute a pollen grain, which at this stage of its development is an immature male gametophyte.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 38-5. Pollen grains have tough, ornate, and distinctive walls. The resilient wall of a pollen grain protects the male gametophyte. This is ragweed pollen (colorized SEM). Because of their tough walls, pollen grains are preserved well in the fossil record. The species of fossilized pollen found in an area can provide insights into the past climates of the area.

A pollen grain becomes a mature male gametophyte when the generative cell divides by mitosis to form two sperm cells. In most species, this process occurs after the pollen grain lands on the stigma of a carpel and the pollen tube begins to form (see FIGURE 38.1).

Development of the Female Gametophyte (Embryo Sac)

Ovules, each containing a single sporangium, form within the chambers of the ovary. One cell in the sporangium of each ovule, the megasporocyte, grows and then goes through meiosis, producing four haploid megaspores (FIGURE 38.4b).

The details of the next steps vary extensively, depending on the species. In many angiosperms (such as the one illustrated in FIGURE 38.4), only one of the megaspores survives. This megaspore continues to grow, and its nucleus divides by mitosis three times, resulting in one large cell with eight haploid nuclei. Membranes then partition this mass into a multicellular female gametophyte--the embryo sac. At one end of the embryo sac are three cells: the egg cell, or female gamete, and two cells called synergids. The synergids flank the egg cell and function in the attraction and guidance of the pollen tube. At the opposite end of the embryo sac are three antipodal cells of unknown function. The remaining two nuclei, called polar nuclei, are not partitioned into separate cells but share the cytoplasm of the large central cell of the embryo sac. The ovule, which will eventually become a seed, now consists of the embryo sac and the surrounding integuments (protective layers of sporophytic tissue).

Pollination

Pollination, which brings the male and female gametophytes together, is the first step in the chain of events that leads to fertilization. This step is accomplished in various ways. Some angiosperms, including grasses and many trees, use wind as a pollinating agent. They compensate for the randomness of this dispersal by releasing enormous quantities of tiny pollen grains. At certain times of the year, the air is loaded with pollen, as anyone plagued with pollen allergies can attest. Many angiosperms, however, do not rely on the aimless wind to carry pollen but interact with insects or other animals that transfer pollen directly between flowers.




