
 Signal-transduction pathways link internal and environmental signals to cellular responses

In the back corner of a food cabinet, a long forgotten potato (a modified underground stem, or tuber) has sprouted shoots from its "eyes" (axillary buds). These shoots, however, scarcely resemble those of a typical plant. Instead of broad green leaves and sturdy stems, these dark-sprouted shoots are ghostly pale, have stems that are long and thin, bear leaves that are unexpanded, and give rise to roots that are reduced (FIGURE 39.1a). Seedlings germinated in the dark have a similar appearance. These morphological adaptations for growing in darkness make sense if we consider that a potato or a seedling, in nature, usually encounters continuous darkness when sprouting underground. In such circumstances, the pre-emergent plant is supported by the surrounding soil and would not benefit from a thick stem. Expanded leaves would be a hindrance to soil penetration and would be damaged as the shoots pushed upward. Because the leaves are unexpanded, there is little evaporative loss of water, and little requirement for an extensive root system to replace the water lost by transpiration. The energy expended in producing green chlorophyll would be wasted since there is no light for photosynthesis. Rather, a plant growing in the dark allocates as much energy as possible to the elongation of stems. This "strategy" enables the shoots to break ground before the stored food reserves in the tuber or seed are exhausted.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 39-1. Light-induced greening of dark-sprouted potatoes. (a) A dark-grown potato has tall, spindly stems and nonexpanded leaves--a morphological adaptation that enables the shoots to penetrate the soil. The roots are short, but little water is lost by the shoots. (b) After a week's exposure to natural daylight, the potato plant begins to resemble a typical plant with broad green leaves, short sturdy stems, and long roots. This transformation begins with the reception of light by a specific pigment

Once a shoot reaches the sunlight, its morphology and biochemistry undergo profound changes collectively called greening: the elongation rate of the stems slows, the leaves expand, the roots start to elongate, and the entire shoot begins to produce chlorophyll; in short, it begins to resemble a typical plant (FIGURE 39.1b). In the following discussion, we use this greening response as an example of how a plant cell receives a signal--in this case, light--and how this reception is transduced into a response (greening). Along the way we will explore how studies of mutants have provided valuable insights into the roles played by various molecules in the three stages of cell-signal processing: reception, transduction, and response (FIGURE 39.2).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 39-2. Review of a general model for signal-transduction pathways. A hormone or other signal binding to a specific receptor stimulates the cell to produce second messengers. Second messengers trigger the cell's various responses to the original signal. In this diagram, the receptor is on the surface of the target cell. In other cases, hormones enter cells and bind to specific receptors inside.

Reception

Signals, whether internal or external, are first detected by receptors, proteins that undergo conformational changes in response to a specific stimulus. The receptor involved in greening in plants is called phytochrome, which consists of a light-absorbing pigment attached to a specific protein. Unlike many receptors, which are built into the plasma membrane, the phytochrome that functions in greening occurs in the cytoplasm. Researchers have demonstrated the requirement for phytochrome in greening through studies of a tomato mutant called aurea. The mutant, which has lower-than-normal levels of phytochrome, greens less than wild-type tomatoes when exposed to light. (The name aurea comes from the Latin for "gold-colored." In the absence of chlorophyll, the yellow plant pigments called carotenoids are more obvious.) Researchers were able to produce a normal greening response by using a microneedle to inject phytochrome extracted from other plants into aurea leaf cells and then exposing the aurea to light. Such experiments support the hypothesis that phytochrome functions in light detection in the greening process.

Transduction

The greening response is triggered by extremely low levels of light. For example, light levels equivalent to a few seconds of moonlight are sufficient to cause a slowing of stem elongation in dark-grown oat seedlings. Receptors such as phytochrome are sensitive to very weak environmental and chemical signals. How is the information from these extremely weak signals amplified, and how is their reception transduced into a specific response by the plant? The answer is second messengers--small, internally produced chemicals that transfer and amplify the signal from the receptor to proteins that cause the specific response. In the greening response, for example, each activated phytochrome may give rise to hundreds of molecules of a second messenger, each of which, in turn, may lead to the activation of hundreds of molecules of a specific enzyme. By such mechanisms, the second messenger of a signal transduction pathway leads to a rapid amplification of the signal. In Chapter 11, we examined this role of second messengers in general (see FIGURE 11.12). Here, let's specifically consider the production of second messengers and their function in the greening response (FIGURE 39.3). Refer to the diagram frequently as you read the text description of this complex process.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 39-3. An example of signal transduction in plants: the role of phytochrome in the greening response. The light signal is detected by the phytochrome receptor, which then activates at least two signal-transduction pathways involving G-proteins. 
			  
		 One pathway leads to cGMP as a second messenger that activates a protein kinase cascade (see FIGURE 11.11). 
			  
		 The other pathway leads to formation of a Ca2+1-calmodulin complex that activates a specific protein kinase. 
			  
		 Both pathways lead to expression of genes for the proteins that function in the greening response. We do not present such a complex diagram because its details are important for you to remember. The main point of this diagram: Signal transduction pathways in plants are variations of the general schemes you learned about in Chapter 11, involving such components as G-proteins, second messengers, and protein kinases.

As we discussed in Chapter 11, many receptors interact with guanine-binding proteins (G-proteins). Phytochrome is such a receptor. Light causes phytochrome to undergo a conformational change, and the phytochrome then interacts with a specific G-protein. During activation, guanosine diphosphate (GDP) that is bound to the inactive G-protein is displaced by guanosine triphosphate (GTP). The G-protein, now in its active form, in turn activates other enzymes in the signal-transduction pathway that leads to greening. For example, phytochrome-activated G-proteins activate guanyl cyclase, the enzyme that produces cyclic GMP, a second messenger. In aurea tomato cells, G-protein inhibitors such as cholera toxin block greening after microinjection of phytochrome, whereas G-protein activators such as pertussis toxin stimulate the response.

The cyclic nucleotides are second messengers that include cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cyclic AMP) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cyclic GMP). In some cases, cyclic nucleotides activate specific protein kinases (enzymes that phosphorylate and activate other proteins--see FIGURE 11.11). Experiments indicate that cyclic GMP (cGMP) is involved in the greening process. The microinjection of cGMP into aurea tomato cells induces a partial greening response, even without addition of phytochrome.

Changes in cytosolic Ca+ also play an important role in phytochrome signal transduction. The levels of Ca+ are generally very low in the cytosol (about 10-7M). However, a wide range of hormonal and environmental stimuli can cause brief increases in cytosolic Ca+. In many cases, Ca2+ then binds directly to small proteins called calmodulins. The Ca+-calmodulin complex then binds to and activates several enzymes, most notably certain types of protein kinases. Note in FIGURE 39.3 that phytochrome activation during the greening mechanism results in both cGMP and Ca+-calmodulin as second messengers.

Response

Ultimately, a signal-transduction pathway leads to the regulation of one or more cellular activities. In most cases, especially when changes in development are involved, these responses to stimulation involve the increased activity of certain enzymes. The two main mechanisms by which a signaling pathway can activate an enzyme are by stimulating transcription of mRNA for the enzyme or by activating existing enzyme molecules (post-translational modification).

Transcriptional Regulation.Transcription factors bind directly to specific regions of DNA and control the transcription of specific genes (see FIGURE 19.8). In the case of phytochrome-induced greening, several transcription factors are activated by phosphorylation in response to the appropriate light conditions. The activation of some of these transcription factors depends upon cyclic GMP, whereas the activation of others requires Ca+-calmodulin.

The mechanism by which a signal promotes a new developmental course may depend on the activation of positive transcriptional factors (proteins that increase transcription of specific genes) or the deactivation of negative transcriptional factors (proteins that decrease transcription), or both. For example, there are Arabidopsis mutants that, except for their pale color, have a light-grown morphology (expanded leaves and short, sturdy stems) when grown in the dark (they are not green because the final step in chlorophyll production requires direct light). These mutants have defects in a negative transcriptional factor that inhibits the expression of other genes normally activated by light. When the negative factor is eliminated by mutation, the pathway that it normally blocks becomes activated: hence, these mutants, except for their pale color, appear to have been grown in the light.

Post-Translational Modification of Proteins.Although the synthesis of new proteins by transcription and translation are important molecular events associated with greening, so are post-translational modifications of existing proteins. Most often these existing proteins are modified by phosphorylation, the addition of a phosphate group onto the protein. The diverse proteins called protein kinases catalyze this phosphorylation of target proteins (see FIGURE 11.11). Many second messengers, such as cGMP, and some receptors themselves, including some forms of phytochrome, activate protein kinases directly. About 2-3%  of all plant genes may encode for protein kinases. Often one protein kinase will phosphorylate another protein kinase, which then phosphorylates another, and so on. Such kinase cascades may eventually link initial stimuli to responses at the level of gene expression, usually via the phosphorylation of transcription factors. By such mechanisms, many signal pathways ultimately regulate the synthesis of new proteins, usually by turning specific genes on or off (FIGURE 39.3).

Signal pathways must also have a means for turning off once the initial signal is no longer present--for example, what if we put the potato back into the cupboard? Protein phosphatases, enzymes that dephosphorylate specific proteins, are involved in these "switch-off" processes. At any given moment, the activities of a cell depend upon the balance of activity of many types of protein kinases and protein phosphatases.

The Greening Proteins.What sorts of proteins are either newly transcibed or activated by phosphorylation during the greening process? Many are enzymes that function in photosynthesis directly; others are enzymes involved in supplying the chemical precursors necessary for chlorophyll production; still others affect the levels of plant hormones that regulate growth. For example, the levels of two hormones that enhance stem elongation will decrease following phytochrome activation--hence, the reduction in stem elongation that accompanies greening.

We have discussed the signal transduction involved in the greening response of a potato in some detail to give you a sense of the complexity of biochemical changes that underlie this one process. As you read on, keep in mind that every plant hormone and every environmental stimulus triggers one or more signal transduction pathways of comparable complexity. As we have seen in the case of the tomato mutant aurea, the techniques of molecular biology combined with studies of mutants are helping researchers elucidate these various pathways. But molecular biology builds upon a long history of careful physiological and biochemical investigations into how plants work. Indeed, as you will read in the next section, it was classical observations and experiments that provided biologists with the first clue that chemical signals--hormones--serve as internal regulators of plant growth and development.




