
 The inner mitochondrial membrane couples electron transport to ATP synthesis: a closer look

Our main objective in this chapter is to learn how cells harvest the energy of food to make ATP. But the metabolic components of respiration we have dissected so far, glycolysis and the Krebs cycle, produce only four molecules of ATP per glucose molecule, all by substrate-level phosphorylation: two net ATPs from glycolysis and two ATPs from the Krebs cycle. At this point, molecules of NADH (and FADH2) account for most of the energy extracted from the food. These electron escorts link glycolysis and the Krebs cycle to the machinery for oxidative phosphorylation, which uses energy released by the electron transport chain to power ATP synthesis. In this section, you will first learn how the electron transport chain works, then how the inner membrane of the mitochondrion couples ATP synthesis to electron flow down the chain.

The Pathway of Electron Transport

You learned earlier that the electron transport chain is a collection of molecules embedded in the inner membrane of the mitochondrion. The folding of the inner membrane to form cristae increases its surface area, providing space for thousands of copies of the chain in each mitochondrion. (Once again, we see that structure fits function.) Most components of the chain are proteins. Tightly bound to these proteins are prosthetic groups, nonprotein components essential for the catalytic functions of certain enzymes. During electron transport along the chain, these prosthetic groups alternate between reduced and oxidized states as they accept and donate electrons.

FIGURE 9.13 (p. 166) shows the sequence of electron carriers in the electron transport chain and the drop in free energy as electrons travel down the chain. Electrons removed from food during glycolysis and the Krebs cycle are transferred by NADH to the first molecule of the electron transport chain. This molecule is a flavoprotein, so named because it has a prosthetic group called flavin mononucleotide (FMN in FIGURE 9.13). In the next redox reaction, the flavoprotein returns to its oxidized form as it passes electrons to an iron-sulfur protein (FeS in FIGURE 9.13), one of a family of proteins with both iron and sulfur tightly bound. The iron-sulfur protein then passes the electrons to a compound called ubiquinone (Q in FIGURE 9.13). This electron carrier is a lipid, the only member of the electron transport chain that is not a protein.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 9-13. Free-energy change during electron transport. Each member of the chain oscillates between a reduced state and an oxidized state. A component of the chain becomes reduced when it accepts electrons from its "uphill" neighbor, which has a lower affinity for electrons (is less electronegative). It then returns to its oxidized form as it passes electrons to its "downhill," more electronegative, neighbor. At the bottom of the chain is oxygen, which is very electronegative. The overall energy drop for electrons traveling from NADH to oxygen is 53 kcal/mol, but this fall is broken up into a series of smaller steps by the electron transport chain. The various molecules of the electron transport chain, shown as light purple ovals here, are described in the text. Most of these electron carriers are grouped into multiprotein complexes, shown here and in FIGURE 9.15 in darker purple.

Most of the remaining electron carriers between Q and oxygen are proteins called cytochromes (cyt). Their prosthetic group, called a heme group, has four organic rings surrounding a single iron atom. It is similar to the iron-containing prosthetic group found in hemoglobin, the red protein of blood that transports oxygen. But the iron of cytochromes transfers electrons, not oxygen. The electron transport chain has several types of cytochromes, each a different protein with a heme group. The last cytochrome of the chain, cyt a3, passes its electrons to oxygen, which also picks up a pair of hydrogen ions from the aqueous solution to form water. (An oxygen atom is represented in FIGURE 9.13 as &#189; O2 to emphasize that the electron transport chain reduces molecular oxygen, O2, not individual oxygen atoms. For every two NADH molecules, one O2 molecule is reduced to two molecules of water.)

Another source of electrons for the transport chain is FADH2, the other reduced product of the Krebs cycle. Notice in FIGURE 9.13 that FADH2 adds its electrons to the electron transport chain at a lower energy level than NADH does. Consequently, the electron transport chain provides about one-third less energy for ATP synthesis when the electron donor is FADH2 rather than NADH.

The electron transport chain makes no ATP directly. Its function is to ease the fall of electrons from food to oxygen, breaking a large free-energy drop into a series of smaller steps that release energy in manageable amounts. How does the mitochondrion couple this electron transport and energy release to ATP synthesis? The answer is a mechanism called chemiosmosis.

Chemiosmosis: The Energy-Coupling Mechanism

Populating the inner membrane of the mitochondrion are many copies of a protein complex called ATP synthase, the enzyme that actually makes ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate (FIGURE 9.14). ATP synthase works like an ion pump running in reverse. Recall from Chapter 8 that ion pumps use ATP as an energy source to transport ions against their gradients. In the reverse of that process, ATP synthase uses the energy of an existing ion gradient to power ATP synthesis. The ion gradient that drives oxidative phosphorylation is a proton (hydrogen ion) gradient; that is, the power source for the ATP synthase is a difference in the concentration of H+ on opposite sides of the inner mitochondrial membrane. (We can also think of this gradient as a difference in pH, since pH is a measure of H+ concentration.)



Click image to enlarge



Fig 9-14. ATP synthase, a molecular mill. The ATP synthase protein complex functions as a mill, powered by the flow of hydrogen ions. This complex resides in mitochondrial and chloroplast membranes of eukaryotes and in the plasma membranes of prokaryotes. ATP synthase has three main parts: a rotor, a rod, and a knob. Each part consists of a number of protein subunits.

How does the mitochondrial membrane generate and maintain an H+ gradient? That is the function of the electron transport chain, which is shown in its mitochondrial location in FIGURE 9.15 (p. 168). The chain is an energy converter that uses the exergonic flow of electrons to pump H+ across the membrane, from the matrix into the intermembrane space. The H+ leaks back across the membrane, diffusing down its gradient. But the ATP synthases are the only patches of the membrane that are freely permeable to H+. The ions pass through a channel in ATP synthase, and this protein complex uses the exergonic flow of H+ to drive the oxidative phosphorylation of ADP. Thus, an H+ gradient across a membrane couples the redox reactions of the electron transport chain to ATP synthesis. This coupling mechanism is called chemiosmosis (from the Greek osmos, push), a term that highlights the connection between the chemical reaction that makes ATP and transport across a membrane. We have previously used the word osmosis in discussing water transport, but here we are referring to the flow of H+ across a membrane.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 9-15. Chemiosmosis couples the electron transport chain to ATP synthesis. NADH shuttles high-energy electrons extracted from food during glycolysis and the Krebs cycle to an electron transport chain built into the inner mitochondrial membrane. The gold arrow traces the transport of electrons, which finally pass to oxygen at the "downhill" end of the chain to form water. As FIGURE 9.13 showed, most of the electron carriers of the chain are grouped into three complexes, each represented here by a purple blob embedded in the membrane. Two mobile carriers, ubiquinone (Q) and cytochrome c, move rapidly along the membrane, ferrying electrons between the three large complexes. As each complex of the chain accepts and then donates electrons, it pumps hydrogen ions (protons) from the mitochondrial matrix into the intermembrane space. Thus, chemical energy originally harvested from food is transformed into a proton-motive force, a gradient of H+ across the membrane. The hydrogen ions flow back, down their gradient, through a channel in an ATP synthase, another protein complex built into the membrane. The ATP synthase harnesses the proton-motive force to phosphorylate ADP, forming ATP. (This phosphorylation is called oxidative because it is driven by the loss of electrons from food molecules.) The use of an H+ gradient (proton-motive force) to transfer energy from redox reactions to cellular work (ATP synthesis, in this case) is called chemiosmosis.

If you have followed this complex story of chemiosmosis so far, you should have at least two questions. How does the electron transport chain pump hydrogen ions? And how does the ATP synthase use H+ backflow to make ATP? In answer to the first question, researchers have found that certain members of the electron transport chain accept and release protons (H+) along with electrons. At certain steps along the chain, electron transfers cause H+ to be taken up and released back into the surrounding solution. The electron carriers are spatially arranged in the membrane in such a way that H+ is accepted from the mitochondrial matrix and deposited in the intermembrane space (see FIGURE 9.15 again). The H+ gradient that results is referred to as a proton-motive force, emphasizing the capacity of the gradient to perform work. The force drives H+ back across the membrane through the specific H+ channels provided by ATP synthase complexes.

Scientists are also learning how the flow of H+ through ATP synthase powers ATP generation. This new understanding of ATP synthase function has emerged from studies of its molecular structure (see FIGURE 9.14). The ATP synthase complex consists of three main parts: a cylindrical rotor within the inner mitochondrial membrane, a knob protruding into the mitochondrial matrix, and an internal rod connecting the two. When hydrogen ions flow through the cylinder down their gradient, they cause the cylinder and the attached rod to rotate, much as a rushing stream turns a waterwheel. The spinning rod brings about a conformational change in the knob, activating catalytic sites where ADP and inorganic phosphate combine to make ATP.

In general terms, chemiosmosis is an energy-coupling mechanism that uses energy stored in the form of an H+gradient across a membrane to drive cellular work. In mitochondria, the energy for gradient formation comes from exergonic redox reactions, and ATP synthesis is the work performed. But chemiosmosis also occurs elsewhere and in other variations. Chloroplasts use chemiosmosis to generate ATP during photosynthesis; in these organelles, light (rather than chemical energy) drives both electron flow down an electron transport chain and H+ gradient formation. Prokaryotes, which lack both mitochondria and chloroplasts, generate H+ gradients across their plasma membranes. They then tap the proton-motive force not only to make ATP but also to pump nutrients and waste products across the membrane and to rotate their flagella.

Experiments with bacteria first led British biochemist Peter Mitchell to propose chemiosmosis as an energy-coupling mechanism in 1961. Nearly two decades later, after many scientists had confirmed the centrality of chemiosmosis in energy conversions within bacteria, mitochondria, and chloroplasts, Mitchell was awarded the Nobel Prize. Chemiosmosis has helped unify the study of bioenergetics.




