
Chapter 14: MENDEL AND THE GENE IDEA

GREGOR MENDEL'S DISCOVERIES

   Mendel brought an experimental and quantitative approach to genetics

   By the law of segregation, the two alleles for a character are packaged into separate gametes

   By the law of independent assortment, each pair of alleles segregates into gametes independently

   Mendelian inheritance reflects rules of probability

   Mendel discovered the particulate behavior of genes: a review



EXTENDING MENDELIAN GENETICS

   The relationship between genotype and phenotype is rarely simple



MENDELIAN INHERITANCE IN HUMANS

   Pedigree analysis reveals Mendelian patterns in human inheritance

   Many human disorders follow Mendelian patterns of inheritance

   Technology is providing new tools for genetic testing and counseling

Eyes of brown, blue, green, or gray; hair of black, brown, blond, or red--these are just a few examples of heritable variations that we may observe among individuals in a population. What genetic principles account for the transmission of such traits from parents to offspring?

One possible explanation of heredity is a "blending" hypothesis, the idea that genetic material contributed by the two parents mixes in a manner analogous to the way blue and yellow paints blend to make green. This hypothesis predicts that over many generations, a freely mating population will give rise to a uniform population of individuals. However, our everyday observations and the results of breeding experiments with animals and plants contradict such a prediction. The blending hypothesis also fails to explain other phenomena of inheritance, such as traits skipping a generation.

An alternative to the blending model is a "particulate" hypothesis of inheritance: the gene idea. According to this model, parents pass on discrete heritable units--genes--that retain their separate identities in offspring. An organism's collection of genes is more like a bucket of marbles than a pail of paint. Like marbles, genes can be sorted and passed along, generation after generation, in undiluted form.

Modern genetics had its genesis in an abbey garden, where a monk named Gregor Mendel documented a particulate mechanism of inheritance. In the painting on this page, Mendel works with his experimental organism, garden peas. Mendel developed his theory of inheritance several decades before the behavior of chromosomes was observed in the microscope and their significance understood. So in this chapter, we digress from the study of chromosomes to recount how Mendel arrived at his theory. We will also see how the Mendelian model applies to the inheritance of human variations.




