
 Secondary endosymbiosis increased the diversity of algae

We mentioned in our overview of protists that taxonomic groups with plastids--plants and different kinds of algae--are scattered throughout the phylogenetic tree of eukaryotes. The diverse algae display various types of plastids that differ in their ultrastructure, as revealed by electron microscopes. For example, the chloroplasts of plants and a protistan group called green algae have envelopes consisting of two membranes (see FIGURE 7.18). In contrast, some algal groups have plastid envelopes with three or four membranes. For example, the plastids of Euglena (see FIGURE 28.3) have a three-membrane envelope. We also mentioned that some algae are closely related to heterotrophic species. For instance, Euglena belongs to a group of protists that also includes flagellated, heterotrophic forms lacking plastids.

How can we explain the diversity of plastids and the phylogenetic discontinuity of photosynthesis among protists? Support is building for the hypothesis that plastids were acquired independently several times during the early evolution of eukaryotes. The plastids of some algal groups, those with envelopes having more than two membranes, were acquired by secondary endosymbiosis. It was by primary endosymbiosis that certain eukaryotes first acquired the ancestors of plastids by engulfing cyanobacteria. Secondary endosymbiosis occurred after a heterotrophic protist engulfed an alga containing plastids--one eukaryote taking in another eukaryote. In FIGURE 28.5 you see these two modes of plastid acquisition, primary and secondary. How does secondary endosymbiosis explain the observation that some algae have plastids with more than two outer membranes? Each endosymbiotic event adds a membrane derived from the vacuole membrane of the host cell that engulfed the endosymbiont.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 28-5. Secondary endosymbiosis and the origin of algal diversity. Algal species ABC in this diagram contains plastids derived from endosymbionts that were eukaryotic algae that in turn contained plastids derived from cyanobacteria.

In most cases of secondary plastid acquisition, the endosymbiont gradually lost most of its parts, except, of course, its plastid, which became a plastid within the host cell. In some algae, however, the secondary endosymbionts retained other remnants of their independent past. Consider, for example, a group of flagellated protists called cryptomonad algae. The plastids of these algae contain a structure called a nucleomorph, a vestige of the nucleus of the eukaryotic ancestor of the plastid. There is also a trace of the endosymbiont's cytoplasm, complete with ribosomes. In fact, the cryptomonad plastid contains two distinct populations of ribosomes: ribosomes of the eukaryotic type derived from those of the algal endosymbiont's cytoplasm, and ribosomes of the bacterial type derived from a cyanobacterial endosymbiont of the secondary endosymbiont. Thus, a cryptomonad is like a box containing a box containing a box. The main nucleus and cytoplasm are derived from the prokaryotic host cell that engulfed the prokaryotic ancestor of mitochondria. The eukaryotic descendant of that cell was a heterotroph that later became photosynthetic by taking in a eukaryotic alga. But that secondary endosymbiont itself acquired its plastid earlier in its evolutionary history by taking in a cyanobacterium. Thus, we can trace the ultimate origin of all plastids to cyanobacteria. But some algae acquired that photosynthetic equipment secondhand (or even thirdhand, in the case of algae containing endosymbionts of endosymbionts of endosymbionts).

Through all of this discussion of the chimeric origin of eukaryotes, we have ignored the ancestry of the host cell that got it all started by engulfing the ancestor of mitochondria. We'll see in the next subsection that the search for that ancestor turned up some surprises that are changing the way biologists think about the tree of life.




