
 Different types of cells in an organism have the same DNA

Much evidence supports the conclusion that nearly all the cells of an organism havegenomic equivalence--that is, they all have the same genes. What happens to these genes as a cell begins to differentiate? We can shed some light on this question by asking whether genes are irreversibly inactivated during differentiation. For example, does an epidermal cell in your finger contain a viable gene specifying eye color, or has the eye-color gene been destroyed or permanently inactivated there?

Totipotency in Plants

One experimental approach to the question of genomic equivalence is to try to generate a whole organism from differentiated cells of a single type. In many plant species, whole new individualscandevelop from differentiated somatic cells. This was first demonstrated during the 1950s by F. C. Steward and his students at Cornell University, working with carrot plants (FIGURE 21.5). They found that differentiated cells removed from the root (the carrot) and placed in culture medium could grow into normal adult plants, each genetically identical to the "parent" plant. Using a single somatic cell from a multicellular organism to make one or more genetically identical individuals is calledcloning,and each new individual is popularly called aclone.(The meanings of these terms vary with context; for clarification, see the Glossary.) The fact that a mature plant cell can dedifferentiate (reverse its differentiation) and then give rise to all the different kinds of specialized cells of a new plant shows that differentiation does not necessarily involve irreversible changes in the DNA. In plants, at least, cells can remaintotipotent;that is, they can retain the zygote's potential to form all parts of the mature organism. Plant cloning is now used extensively in agriculture.

Nuclear Transplantation in Animals

Differentiated cells from animals will often fail to divide in culture, much less develop into a new organism. Therefore, animal researchers have approached the genomic equivalence question by replacing the nucleus of an unfertilized egg cell or zygote with the nucleus of a differentiated cell. Can a nucleus derived from a differentiated cell direct development of an organism with all the proper tissues and organs? The pioneering experiments in nuclear transplantation were carried out by American embryologists Robert Briggs and Thomas King during the 1950s and were later extended by British embryologist John Gurdon. These investigators removed or destroyed the nucleus of a frog egg cell, then transplanted a nucleus from an embryonic or tadpole cell of the same species into the enucleated eggs (FIGURE 21.6). The ability of the transplanted nucleus to support normal development turned out to be inversely related to the age of the donor. In the case of nuclei from the relatively undifferentiated cells of an early embryo, most of the recipient eggs developed into tadpoles. But with nuclei from the differentiated intestinal cells of a tadpole, fewer than 2%  of the eggs developed into normal tadpoles, and most of the embryos failed to make it through even the earliest stages of development.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 21-6. Nuclear transplantation.After the frog egg nucleus is destroyed by ultraviolet (UV) radiation, a nucleus from a more advanced developmental stage is inserted into the egg to test whether nuclei change irreversibly as cells begin to differentiate. The earlier the developmental stage from which the nucleus comes, the more likely it will support development. Nuclei from very early embryonic stages frequently prove to be totipotent, whereas nuclei from late developmental stages (such as a tadpole) rarely are.

Developmental biologists agree on several conclusions about these results. First, nucleidochange in some way as cells differentiate. Although the base sequence of the DNA usually does not change, chromatin structure alters in specific ways (for example, the methylation of the DNA may change; see p. 363). In frogs and most other animals, nuclear "potency" tends to be restricted more and more as embryonic development and cell differentiation progress. However, biologists also agree that these chromatin changes are sometimes reversible and that the nuclei of most differentiated animal cells probably have all the genes required for making the entire organism. In other words, biologists believe that the cells of the body differ in structure and function not because they contain different genes, but because they express different portions of a common genome.

Researchers working with mammals have long been able to clone animals using nuclei or cells from a variety of early embryos, but until recently, it was not known whether the restriction of genomic potential in differentiated cells of an adult mammal could be reversed. However, in 1997, Scottish researcher Ian Wilmut and his colleagues captured newspaper headlines with the announcement that they had cloned an adult sheep by transplanting the nucleus from an udder (mammary) cell into an unfertilized egg cell from another sheep (FIGURE 21.7). They achieved the necessary dedifferentiation of the nucleus by culturing mammary cells in nutrient-poor medium, which led to arrest of the cell cycle (seeFIGURE 12.13). The cycle stopped at the G1checkpoint, and the cells entered a G0"resting" phase. The researchers then fused these cells with sheep egg cells whose nuclei had been removed. The resulting diploid cells divided to form early embryos, which the researchers implanted into surrogate mothers. One of several hundred of these embryos, they reported, successfully completed normal development. DNA analyses have since shown that the chromosomal DNA of this sheep, "Dolly," is indeed identical to that of the nucleus donor. (Later experiments showed that Dolly's mitochondrial DNA came from the egg cell donor, as we would expect.)



Click image to enlarge



Fig 21-7. Cloning a mammal.
			  
		Mammary cells were taken from the udder of a sheep and grown in culture with only low levels of nutrients. This semistarvation arrested the cell cycle in G0and apparently allowed the cells to dedifferentiate.
			  
		Meanwhile, an egg cell was taken from another sheep and its nucleus removed.
			  
		A mammary cell in G0was fused with the enucleated egg cell by subjecting the two cells to pulses of electrical current, which also stimulated the egg cell to start dividing.
			  
		After growing in culture for six days, the embryo
			  
		was implanted in the uterus of a third sheep, one similar to the egg cell donor.
			  
		The result after gestation was a lamb, Dolly, identical in appearance and in chromosome makeup to the sheep that had donated the mammary cell. (However, Dolly's genes cannot becompletelyidentical to those of the mammary cell donor because Dolly's mitochondrial DNA comes from the egg cell donor.) Dolly was the first reported case of a mammal "cloned" using the nucleus of a differentiated cell. The photograph shows Dolly with her surrogate mother.

In July 1998, researchers in Hawaii reported cloning mice using nuclei from mouse ovary cells, and since then, cloning has been demonstrated in numerous mammals, many important in agriculture. Cloning of farm animals raises safety issues for human consumers, and the possibility of human cloning raises unprecedented ethical issues. However, problems with the cloning process have bought us a little more time for thought. In most cases, only a tiny percentage of cloned embryos develop normally. Why is this? Recently, scientists have found a clue: The DNA of many cloned embryos is improperly methylated, often having extra methyl groups. Because DNA methylation helps regulate gene expression, and appropriate gene expression is key to embryonic development, it makes sense that misplaced methyl groups could interfere with development. Cloning difficulties highlight the fact that we still have much to learn about the basic principles and processes of development.

The Stem Cells of Animals

Another hot research area that depends on the genetic potential retained by animal cells during development involvesstem cells.These are cells with two important properties: As relatively unspecialized cells, they continually reproduce themselves; and under appropriate conditions, they differentiate into specialized cells of one or more types. The adult body has various kinds of stem cells, which serve to replace nonreproducing specialized cells as needed. For example, stem cells in the bone marrow give rise to all the different kinds of blood cells (seeFIGURE 42.15). Another example, whose discovery surprised the scientific world very recently, is stem cells in the adult brain that continue to produce certain kinds of nerve cells there. Stem cells that can give rise to multiple cell types are said to be multipotent or, more often,pluripotent.

Although adults have only tiny numbers of stem cells, scientists are learning to identify and isolate these cells from various tissues and, in some cases, to grow them in culture. Somewhat easier to culture are cells from early embryos, which are mostly "stem cells" that can give rise to differentiated cells of any type. Cultures of theseembryonic stem cellsare "immortal"; the cells reproduce indefinitely (using telomerase to maintain their chromosomal telomeres). Taking this research further, scientists have recently demonstrated that with the right culture conditions (for instance, the addition of specific growth factors), they can make cultured stem cells derived from either source differentiate into specialized cells. Surprisingly, adult stem cells can sometimes be made to differentiate into a wider range of cell types than they normally do in the animal (FIGURE 21.8).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 21-8. Working with stem cells.Animal stem cells--self-perpetuating, relatively undifferentiated cells that can give rise to specialized cells of various types--can be isolated from early embryos or adult tissues and grown in culture. Researchers are seeking to discover the growth conditions that direct stem cells to differentiate into particular cell types.

In addition to providing a valuable means of studying differentiation, stem cell research has enormous potential for medical applications. The ultimate aim is to be able to supply cells for the repair of damaged or diseased organs. For example, providing insulin-producing pancreatic cells to diabetics or certain kinds of brain cells to people with Parkinson's disease or Huntington's disease could conceivably cure these diseases. At the present time, embryonic cells are more promising than adult stem cells for such applications, but because the cells are derived from human embryos (commonly, surplus embryos donated by patients undergoing infertility treatment), their use raises ethical and political issues.

In the next section, we look at the molecular basis of cell differentiation.




