
 Evolution of the amniotic egg expanded the success of vertebrates on land

The amniote clade consists of the mammals, the birds, and the vertebrates we commonly call reptiles, including turtles, lizards, snakes, and crocodiles.

The evolution of amniotes from an amphibian ancestor involved many adaptations for terrestrial living. The amniotic egg, a reproductive adaptation that enabled terrestrial vertebrates to complete their life cycles on land and sever their last ties with their aquatic origins, was a particularly important breakthrough. (Seeds played a similar role in the evolution of land plants, as you learned in Chapter 29.) In contrast to the shell-less eggs of amphibians, amniotic eggs (of birds, most reptiles, and some mammals) have a shell that retains water and can therefore be laid in a dry place. The shells of bird eggs are calcareous (made of calcium carbonate) and inflexible, while the shells of many reptile eggs are leathery and flexible. Most mammals have dispensed with the shell; instead, the embryo implants in the wall of the uterus and obtains its nutrients from the mother.

Reptiles, birds, and mammals all have specialized membranes within the amniotic egg (FIGURE 34.19). Called extra embryonic membranes because they are not part of the body of the developing animal, these structures function in gas exchange, waste storage, and the transfer of stored nutrients to the embryo. They develop from tissue layers that grow out from the embryo. The amniotic egg is named for one of these membranes, the amnion, which encloses a compartment of amniotic fluid that bathes the embryo and acts as a hydraulic shock absorber. The amniotes also show other adaptations to terrestrial life, including waterproof skin and increasing use of the rib cage to ventilate the lungs.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-19. The amniotic egg. The embryos of reptiles, birds, and mammals form four extraembryonic membranes: the amnion, yolk sac, allantois, and chorion. The shell is waterproof, an adaptation that prevents the embryo and the fluid compartments around it from drying out on land. This drawing represents the extraembryonic membranes in the shelled egg of a reptile or bird. Mammals have the four extraembryonic membranes, but in most species the embryos develop without shells in the reproductive tract of the mother.




