
 Nature reserves must be functional parts of landscapes

Nature reserves are biodiversity islands in a sea of habitat degraded to varying degrees by human activity. It is important to realize, however, that protected "islands" are not isolated from their surroundings and that nonequilibrium ecology applies to nature reserves as well as the landscapes in which they are embedded.

An earlier policy--that protected areas should be set aside to remain unchanged forever--was based on the old concept that ecosystems are balanced, self-regulating units. However, as we have discussed in Chapter 53, disturbance is a functional component of all ecosystems, and management policies that ignore natural disturbances or attempt to prevent them have generally proved to be self-defeating. For instance, setting aside an area of a fire-dependent community, such as a portion of a tallgrass prairie, chaparral, or dry pine forest, with the intention of saving it is unrealistic if periodic burning is excluded. Without the dominant disturbance, the fire-adapted species are usually outcompeted by other species, and biodiversity is reduced.

Because human disturbance and fragmentation are increasingly common landscape features, patch dynamics, population dynamics, edges, and corridors are important in the design and management of protected areas. Unfortunately, there are many more questions than answers. For example, is it better to create one large preserve or a group of smaller preserves? One argument for extensive preserves is that large, far-ranging animals with low-density populations, such as the grizzly bear, require extensive habitats. In addition, more extensive areas have proportionately smaller perimeters than smaller areas and are therefore less affected by edges. An argument favoring smaller, disjunct preserves is that they may slow the spread of disease throughout a population. Often outweighing all other considerations, recent and ongoing land use by humans may largely dictate the size and shape of protected areas. Conservationists typically inherit the land that is useless for exploitation by agriculture or forestry.

Several nations have adopted an approach to landscape management called zoned reserve systems. A zoned reserve is an extensive region of land that includes one or more areas undisturbed by humans surrounded by lands that have been changed by human activity and are used for economic gain. The key challenge of the zoned reserve concept is the development of a social and economic climate in the surrounding lands that is compatible with the long-term viability of the protected core area. These surrounding areas continue to be used to support the human population, but with regulations that prevent the types of extensive alterations likely to impact the protected areas. As a result, surrounding tracts of land serve as buffer zones against further intrusion into the undisturbed areas.

The small Central American nation of Costa Rica has become a world leader in establishing zoned reserves. In exchange for reducing its international debt, the Costa Rican government established eight zoned reserves, called "conservation areas" (FIGURE 55.19). Costa Rica is making progress toward managing its zoned reserves, and the buffer zones provide a steady, lasting supply of forest products, water, and hydroelectric power and also support sustainable agriculture and tourism. An important goal is providing a stable economic base for people living there. As ecologist Daniel Janzen, a leader in tropical conservation, has said, "The likelihood of long-term survival of a conserved wildland area is directly proportional to the economic health and stability of the society in which that wildland is embedded." Destructive practices that are not compatible with long-term ecosystem conservation and from which there is often little local profit are gradually being discouraged. Such destructive practices include massive logging, large-scale single-crop agriculture, and extensive mining. Costa Rica looks to its zoned reserve system to maintain at least 80%  of its native species.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 55-19. Zoned reserves in Costa Rica.

The continued high rate of human exploitation of ecosystems leads to the prediction that considerably less than 10%  of the biosphere will ever be protected as nature reserves. Sustaining biodiversity often involves working in landscapes that are almost entirely human dominated. For example, the Florida scrub jay, an endangered endemic species, inhabits dry scrub oak communities that have nearly been replaced by housing developments and citrus groves (FIGURE 55.20). Attempting to understand whether this species could coexist with human development, avian ecologist Reed Bowman, at the Archbold Biological Station in central Florida, examined scrub jay population viability across a gradient of human density. Unfortunately, housing developments, even if they contain some scrub habitats, turn out to be relatively poor environments for the jay. Bowman is now convinced that long-term survival of this bird depends on reserves of contiguous, intact scrub surrounded by areas where some natural vegetation remains--the zoned reserve concept applied to suburbia.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 55-20. An endangered, endemic species in its unique habitat. (a) The Florida scrub jay (Aphelocoma coerulescens) inhabits desertlike scrub communities in central Florida. (b) New housing developments and expanding citrus groves threaten this bird and the remaining fragments of its unique habitat. Ecologists at the Archbold Biological Station, a small reserve with a stable scrub jay population, have found that housing developments do not provide enough food (arthropods) for the jays and are associated with higher mortality of adults. Even if a housing development contains some scrub habitat, it is a difficult place for these birds to rear enough young to offset the increased death rate. Archbold researchers predict that the Florida scrub jay will survive only if reserves of intact oak scrub habitat are maintained and properly managed with prescribed fire.




