
 Mammals diversified extensively in the wake of the Cretaceous extinctions

With the extinction of the dinosaurs and the fragmentation of continents that occurred at the close of the Mesozoic era, mammals underwent an extensive adaptive radiation. There are about 4,500 species of mammals on Earth today. As mammals ourselves, we naturally have a special interest in this class of vertebrates. Let's examine some of the features we share with all other mammals.

Mammalian Characteristics

Vertebrates of the class Mammalia were first defined by Linnaeus by their possession of mammary glands. Mammary glands, which produce milk, are a distinctively mammalian characteristic: All mammalian mothers nourish their babies with milk, a balanced diet rich in fats, sugars, proteins, minerals, and vitamins. Hair is another mammalian characteristic. Like the feathers of birds, hair is made of keratin, although zoologists are uncertain about its evolutionary origin. Mammals are endothermic and most mammals have an active metabolism. Efficient respiratory and circulatory systems (including a four-chambered heart) support a high metabolic rate. A sheet of muscle called the diaphragm helps ventilate the lungs. Hair and a layer of fat under the skin help the body retain metabolic heat.

Most mammals are born rather than hatched. Fertilization is internal, and the embryo develops inside the uterus of the female's reproductive tract. In eutherian (placental) mammals and marsupials, the lining of the mother's uterus and extraembryonic membranes arising from the embryo collectively form a placenta, where nutrients diffuse into the embryo's blood. Eutherians are commonly called placental mammals because, compared to marsupials, their placentas are more complex and provide a more intimate and long-lasting association between the mother and her developing young.

Mammals generally have larger brains than other vertebrates of equivalent size, and many species are capable learners. The relatively long duration of parental care extends the time for offspring to learn important survival skills by observing their parents.

Differentiation of teeth is another important mammalian trait. Whereas the teeth of reptiles are generally conical and uniform in size, the teeth of mammals come in a variety of sizes and shapes adapted for chewing many kinds of foods. Our own dentition, for example, includes teeth modified for shearing (incisors and canine teeth) and for crushing and grinding (premolars and molars). Another part of the feeding apparatus, the jaw, was also remodeled during the evolution of mammals from reptiles, and two of the bones formerly making up the jaw joint were incorporated into the mammalian inner ear (FIGURE 34.30).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-30. The evolution of the mammalian jaw and ear bones. The reptile Dimetrodon (left) was an early synapsid, the lineage that eventually gave rise to the mammals. Morganucodon (right) was one of the first mammals. (a) Notice that the lower jaw of the reptile is composed of several fused bones. In the reptile, two small bones, the quadrate and articular, form part of the jaw joint. (b) The mammalian lower jaw is reduced to a single bone, the dentary, and the location of the jaw joint has shifted. The single-bone lower jaw of mammals is stronger than the multibone jaw of reptiles. (c)-(d) During the evolutionary remodeling of the mammalian skull, the quadrate and articular bones became incorporated into the middle ear as two of the three bones that transmit sound from the eardrum to the inner ear. The steps in this evolutionary remodeling are evident in a succession of fossils of mammal-like reptiles.

The Evolution of Mammals

Mammals evolved from reptilian stock even earlier than birds. The oldest fossils believed to be mammalian date back 220 million years, into the Triassic period. The ancestor of mammals was among the therapsids, part of the synapsid branch of reptilian phylogeny (see FIGURE 34.20). An extensive record of fossils from the Permian and Triassic connects mammals with their reptilian ancestors. These fossils show that the distinctively mammalian structure of the legs, skull, jaws, and teeth evolved in many small stages. The therapsids disappeared during the reign of the dinosaurs, but their mammalian descendants coexisted with the dinosaurs throughout the Mesozoic era. Most Mesozoic mammals were very small--about the size of shrews--and most probably ate insects. A variety of evidence, such as the size of the eye sockets, suggests that these tiny mammals were nocturnal.

As the Cenozoic era dawned in the wake of the Cretaceous extinctions, mammals were in the midst of a great adaptive radiation (though the major lineages may have originated earlier--see FIGURE 25.19). That diversity is represented today in the three major groups: monotremes (egg-laying mammals), marsupials (mammals with pouches), and eutherian (placental) mammals.

Monotremes

Monotremes--the platypuses and the echidnas (spiny anteaters)--are the only living mammals that lay eggs (FIGURE 34.31a). The egg, which is reptilian in structure and development, contains enough yolk to nourish the developing embryo. Monotremes have hair and produce milk, two of the most important trademarks of Mammalia. On the belly of a monotreme mother are specialized glands that secrete milk. After hatching, the baby sucks the milk from the fur of the mother, who has no nipples. The mixture of ancestral reptilian characters and derived characters of mammals suggests that monotremes descended from a very early branch in the mammalian genealogy. Today, monotremes are found only in Australia and New Guinea.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-31. Australian monotremes and marsupials. (a) Short-beaked echidna, a monotreme. Monotremes are the only mammals that lay eggs (inset). Monotremes have hair and milk, but no nipples. (b) A young marsupial. The young of marsupials, such as this Australian brushtail possum, are born very early in their develop ment. They finish their growth while nursing from a nipple (in their mother's pouch in most species).(c) Long-nosed bandicoot, a marsupial. Bandicoots have a pouch that opens to the rear, whereas in other marsupials, such as the kangaroos, it opens to the front. Most bandicoots are diggers and burrowers that eat mainly insects but also some small vertebrates and plant material. Their rear-opening pouch helps protect the young from dirt as the mother digs.

Marsupials

Opossums, kangaroos, bandicoots, and koalas are examples of marsupial mammals. A marsupial is born very early in its development and completes its embryonic development while nursing (FIGURE 34.31b). In most species, the nursing young are held within a maternal pouch called a marsupium. A red kangaroo, for instance, is about the size of a honeybee at its birth, just 33 days after fertilization. Its hind legs are merely buds, but the forelimbs are strong enough for the offspring to crawl from the exit of the reproductive tract to the mother's pouch, a journey lasting a few minutes.

In Australia, marsupials have radiated and filled niches occupied by eutherian (placental) mammals in other parts of the world. Convergent evolution has resulted in a diversity of marsupials that resemble their eutherian counterparts occupying similar ecological roles (FIGURE 34.32, p. 704).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-32. Evolutionary convergence of marsupial and eutherian (placental) mammals. Adaptive radiation in Australia has fit marsupials to many of the ecological roles filled by eutherian mammals on other continents. Convergent evolution has produced a number of remarkable look-alikes. (Drawings are not to scale.)

The opossums of North and South America are the most diverse of only three families of extant marsupials outside the Australian region, though South America had a diverse marsupial fauna throughout the Tertiary period. After the breakup of Pangaea, South America and Australia became island continents, and their marsupials diversified in isolation from the placental mammals that began an adaptive radiation on the northern continents. Australia has not been in contact with another continent since early in the Cenozoic era, about 65 million years ago. The South American fauna, meanwhile, has not remained cloistered. Placental mammals reached South America throughout the Cenozoic. The most important migrations occurred about 12 million years ago and then again about 3 million years ago, when North and South America joined at the Panamanian isthmus. Extensive two-way traffic of animals took place over the land bridge. The biogeography of mammals is another example of the interplay between biological and geologic evolution.

Eutherian (Placental) Mammals

Compared to marsupials, eutherian mammals (placentals) have a longer period of pregnancy. Young eutherians complete their embryonic development within the uterus, joined to the mother by the placenta.

Adaptive radiation during the Cretaceous and early Tertiary periods produced the orders of eutherian mammals we recognize today (Table 34.1). Marsupials and eutherians are more closely related to each other than either is to monotremes. Fossil evidence indicates that marsupials and eutherians may have diverged from a common ancestor about 80 to 100 million years ago, but the molecular clock suggests an older date, at least 125 million years ago. The common ancestor of monotremes and the other two groups may have lived more like 200 million years ago.

Table 34-1. Major Orders of Mammals (Orders are color-coded according to the clades in FIGURE 34.33)

Order ExamplesMain CharacteristicsMonotremata Platypuses, echidnasLay eggs; have no nipples; suck milk from fur of mother



Marsupialia Kangaroos, opossums, koalasEmbryonic development completed in marsupial pouch



Proboscidea ElephantsHave a long, muscular trunk; thick, loose skin; upper incisors elongated as tusks



Sirenia Sea cows (manatees)Aquatic herbivores; possess finlike forelimbs and no hindlimbs



Edentata Sloths, anteaters, armadillosHave reduced or no teeth



Rodentia Squirrels, beavers, rats, porcupines, micePossess chisel-like continuously growing incisor teeth



Lagomorpha Rabbits, hares, pikasPossess chisel-like incisors, hind legs longer than forelegs and adapted for running and jumping



Primates Lemurs, monkeys, apes, humansOpposable thumb; forward-facing eyes; well-developed cerebral cortex; omnivorous



Carnivora Dogs, wolves, bears, cats, weasels, otters, seals, walrusesCarnivorous; possess sharp, pointed canine teeth and molars for shearing



CetartiodactylaArtiodactyls Sheep, pigs, cattle, deer, giraffesPossess hooves with an even number of toes on each foot;herbivorous



Cetaceans Whales, dolphins, porpoisesMarine forms with fish-shaped bodies, paddlelike forelimbs and no hind limbs; thick layer of insulating blubber



Perissodactyla Horses, zebras, tapirs, rhinocerosesPossess hooves with an odd number of toes on each foot; herbivorous



Chiroptera BatsAdapted for flying; possess a broad skinfold that extends from elongated fingers to body and legs



Insectivora"Core insectivores": some moles, some shrewsInsect-eating mammals



Molecular systematics has helped to clarify the evolutionary relationships among the orders of eutherian mammals, though there is still no broad consensus on a phylogenetic tree. The main current hypothesis clusters the eutherian orders into four main clades (FIGURE 34.33).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-33. Hypothetical cladogram of mammals.

One branch includes the elephants, together with several less well-known African mammals, such as the aardvarks and hyraxes, as well as manatees. This eutherian clade is referred to as the Afrotheria.

A second branch underwent a radiation in South America, and consists of the sloths, anteaters, and armadillos--the order Edentata in TABLE 34.1.

A third clade includes the bats (Chiroptera), certain insectivorous mammals (the "core insectivores," such as some of the animals that have the common names shrews and moles), carnivores, two ungulate (hoofed) orders--artiodactyls (pigs, cows, camels, and hippos) and perissodactyls (horses and rhinoceroses)--together with the cetaceans (dolphins and whales). One of the most striking results of recent phylogenetic research on mammals is that the cetaceans probably form a branch within the artiodactyls. Thus, hippos are more closely related to whales and dolphins than they are to other artiodactyls, such as sheep and camels. In late 2001, in fact, researchers reported an Eocene whale fossil (Rodhocetus) in Pakistan that has a foot skeleton very similar to the foot anatomy of hippos and pigs. The hypothetical mammalian phylogeny based on molecular systematics predicts that whales with hoof-like swimming appendages once lived, and now the fossil record has corroborated the molecular evidence. The traditional order Artiodactyla is therefore not monophyletic, and researchers suggest that the cetaceans and artiodactyls should be combined in the order Cetartiodactyla (see TABLE 34.1). The order Carnivora includes cats, dogs, raccoons, skunks, and the pinnipeds (seals, sea lions, and walruses). Seals and their relatives apparently evolved from middle Cenozoic carnivorans that became adapted for swimming.

The fourth eutherian branch is by far the largest in terms of numbers of modern species. It contains the lagomorphs (rabbits and relatives) and rodents, together with the primates. Order Rodentia includes rats, mice, squirrels, and beavers. With about 1,770 species, this is by far the largest order of mammals. The name Rodentia, from the Latin word for "gnawing," refers to one of the distinctive features of the group: Both the upper jaw and the lower jaw have a pair of large front teeth (incisors) that resist heavy wear by growing continually. Order Primates, which we discuss next, includes monkeys, apes, and humans.




