
 Organisms transform energy

Energy is the capacity to do work--that is, to move matter against opposing forces, such as gravity and friction. Put another way, energy is the ability to rearrange a collection of matter. For example, you expend energy to turn the pages of this book. Energy exists in various forms, and the work of life depends on the ability of cells to transform energy from one type into another.

Anything that moves possesses a form of energy called kinetic energy, the energy of motion. Moving objects perform work by imparting motion to other matter: A pool player uses the motion of the cue stick to push the cue ball, which in turn moves the other balls; water gushing through a dam turns turbines; electrons flowing along a wire run household appliances; the contraction of leg muscles pushes bicycle pedals. Light is also a type of kinetic energy that can be harnessed to perform work, such as powering photosynthesis in green plants. Heat, or thermal energy, is kinetic energy that results from the random movement of molecules.

A resting object not presently at work may still possess energy, which, remember, is the capacity to do work. Stored energy, or potential energy, is energy that matter possesses because of its location or structure. Water behind a dam, for instance, stores energy because of its altitude. Chemical energy, a form of potential energy especially important to biologists, is stored in molecules as a result of the arrangement of the atoms in those molecules.

How is energy converted from one form to another? Consider, for example, the playground scene in FIGURE 6.2. The girl at the bottom of the slide transformed kinetic energy to potential energy when she climbed the ladder up to the slide. This stored energy was converted back to kinetic energy as she slid down. It was another source of potential energy--the chemical energy in the food she ate for breakfast--that enabled the girl to climb the ladder in the first place.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 6-2. Transformations between kinetic and potential energy. The children have more potential energy at the top of the slide (because of the effect of gravity) than they do at the bottom.

Chemical energy can be tapped when chemical reactions rearrange the atoms of molecules in such a way that potential energy stored in the molecules is converted to kinetic energy. This transformation occurs, for example, in the engine of an automobile when the hydrocarbons of gasoline react explosively with oxygen, releasing the energy that pushes the pistons. Similarly, chemical energy fuels organisms. Cellular respiration and other catabolic pathways unleash energy stored in sugar and other complex molecules and make that energy available for cellular work. Each child who climbed the ladder in FIGURE 6.2 transformed some of the chemical energy that was stored in the organic molecules of food to the kinetic energy of his or her movements. The chemical energy stored in these fuel molecules had itself been derived from light energy by plants during photosynthesis. Organisms are energy transformers.




