
 Imprinting is learning limited to a sensitive period

Some of the most interesting cases where learning interacts closely with innate behavior involve the phenomenon known as imprinting, learning that is limited to a specific time period in an animal's life and that is generally irreversible. You may have seen young ducks or geese following their mother. Mother-offspring bonding in species with parental care is a critical part of the reproductive cycle. If bonding fails to happen, the parent will not initiate care of the infant. The result is certain death for the offspring and loss of reproductive fitness for the parent. But how do the young know whom--or what--to follow? In his most famous study, Konrad Lorenz divided a clutch of graylag goose eggs, leaving some with the mother and putting the rest in an incubator. The young reared by the mother showed normal behavior, following her about as goslings and eventually growing up to interact and mate with other geese. When the artificially incubated eggs hatched, the geese spent their first few hours with the researcher instead of with their mother. From that day on, they steadfastly followed Lorenz and showed no recognition of their own mother or other adults of their own species (FIGURE 51.9). As adults, the birds continued to prefer the company of Lorenz and other humans over that of their own species, and they sometimes even initiated courtship behavior with humans.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 51-9. Imprinting. Konrad Lorenz was "mother" to these imprinted geese.

Apparently, graylag geese have no innate sense of "mother" or "I am a goose, you are a goose." Instead, they simply respond to and identify with the first object they encounter that has certain key characteristics. What is innate in these birds is the ability or tendency to respond; the outside world provides the imprinting stimulus, something to which the response will be directed. The most important imprinting stimulus in Lorenz's graylag geese was movement of an object away from the young, although the effect was greater if the object emitted some sound. The sound did not have to be that of a goose, however; Lorenz found that a box with a ticking clock in it was readily and permanently accepted as "mother."

In contrast to other types of learning, imprinting is distinguished by a sensitive period, a limited phase in an animal's development when learning of particular behaviors can take place. Lorenz found, for example, that geese totally isolated from any moving objects during the first two days after hatching, which is the sensitive period for imprinting on parents, failed to imprint on anything afterward. Imprinting has commonly been thought of as involving very young animals and rather short sensitive periods. But it is now clear that a similar learning process occurs in older animals and that the sensitive period may be of various durations. For example, just as a young bird requires imprinting to "know" its parents, the adults must also imprint to recognize their young. For a day or two after their young hatch, adult herring gulls will accept and even defend a strange chick introduced into their nesting territory. After imprinting, which is probably based largely on individually variable cues, such as the call notes of chicks, the adults will kill and eat any strange chick.

By imprinting on their parents, young birds first learn who will care for them and subsequently learn species identity and the kind of bird they should mate with later in life. Not only does this sexual imprinting occur later, but the sensitive period lasts longer. For example, in one study involving two closely related species of finches, young males of one species were reared first with members of their own species, then with members of the other species during their several-week-long sensitive period for sexual identity. Later, when exposed to females of their own species, they mated quite reluctantly. They readily mated with females of the other species, however, even when they had not seen any members of that species for as long as eight years. Identification with the second species had been permanently imprinted. Although a sensitive period and irreversibility characterize imprinting, these phenomena are not always rigidly fixed. For example, the cross-fostered finches did eventually mate with females of their own species.




