
 Interactions between myosin and actin generate force during muscle contractions

When a muscle contracts, the length of each sarcomere is reduced; that is, the distance from one Z line to the next becomes shorter. In the contracted sarcomere, the A bands do not change in length, but the I bands shorten and the H zone disappears (FIGURE 49.32). These changes can be explained by the sliding-filament model of muscle contraction. According to this model, neither the thin filaments nor the thick filaments change in length when the muscle contracts; rather, the filaments slide past each other longitudinally, so that the degree of overlap of the thin and thick filaments increases. If the region of overlap increases, both the length occupied only by thin filaments (the I band) and the length occupied only by thick filaments (the H zone) must decrease.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 49-32. The sliding-filament model of muscle contraction. As seen in these transmission electron micrographs, the lengths of the thick (myosin) filaments (purple) and thin (actin) filaments (orange) remain the same as contraction occurs. (a) In a relaxed muscle, the length of each sarcomere is greater than in a contracting or contracted muscle. (b) During contraction, thick and thin filaments slide past each other, shortening the sarcomere. (c) When the muscle is fully contracted, the sarcomere is markedly shortened; the thin filaments overlap, and there is little or no space between the ends of the thick filaments and the Z lines.

The sliding of the filaments is based on the interaction of the actin and myosin molecules that make up the thin and thick filaments. Myosin consists of a long, fibrous "tail" region, with a globular "head" region sticking off to the side. The tail is where the individual myosin molecules cohere to form the thick filament. The myosin head is the center of bioenergetic reactions that power muscle contractions. It can bind ATP and hydrolyze it into ADP and inorganic phosphate. Some of the energy released by cleaving the ATP is transferred to the myosin, which changes shape to a high-energy configuration (FIGURE 49.33). This energized myosin binds to a specific site on actin, forming a cross-bridge. The stored energy is released, and the myosin head relaxes to its low-energy configuration. This relaxation changes the angle of attachment of the myosin head to the myosin tail. According to this hypothesis, as the myosin bends inward on itself, it exerts tension on the thin filament to which it is bound, pulling the thin filament toward the center of the sarcomere. The bond between the low-energy myosin and actin is broken when a new molecule of ATP binds to the myosin head. In a repeating cycle, the free head can then cleave the new ATP to revert to the high-energy configuration and attach to a new binding site on another actin molecule farther along the thin filament. Each of the approximately 350 heads of a thick filament forms and re-forms about five cross-bridges per second, driving filaments past each other.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 49-33. One hypothesis for how myosin-actin interactions generate the force for muscle contraction.

A muscle cell typically stores only enough ATP for a few contractions. Muscle cells also store glycogen between the myofibrils, but most of the energy needed for repetitive muscle contraction is stored in substances called phosphagens. Creatine phosphate, the phosphagen of vertebrates, can supply a phosphate group to ADP to make ATP.




