
 Vertebrate systematists are reevaluating the classification of amniotes

FIGURE 34.20 diagrams the phylogeny of amniotes, with some of the clades identified as boxed names on the branches. Note that the amniotes are a monophyletic group (clade), with all modern reptiles, birds, and mammals sharing a common ancestor.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-20. A hypothetical phylogeny of amniotes. Extant groups are named at the top in boldface type.

An evolutionary radiation of amniotes during the early Mesozoic era gave rise to three main groups, called synapsids, anapsids, and diapsids--names based on key differences between the three groups in their skull anatomy. The synapsids included mammal-like reptiles called therapsids, from which mammals evolved. The anapsid lineage is probably totally extinct. Until recently, systematists considered turtles, based on skull anatomy, to be the only surviving anapsids. However, molecular comparisons place the turtles with the diapsids (the dotted branch in FIGURE 34.20 represents the still-uncertain ancestry of turtles). The diapsids include most or all (depending on the position of turtles) groups of modern reptiles, as well as a diversity of extinct swimming, flying, and land-based reptiles.

During the early Mesozoic radiation of amniotes, the diapsid lineage split into two evolutionary branches, the lepidosaurs (which include lizards, snakes, and two species of New Zealand animals called tuataras) and the archosaurs (which include crocodiles and alligators, dinosaurs, and birds). It's important to note the position of birds in the amniote phylogeny. Birds are diapsids, specifically members of the archosaur clade. Their closest extant relatives are the crocodiles and alligators, but they are even more closely related to a branch of the extinct reptiles known as dinosaurs. In fact, neither dinosaurs nor reptiles represent monophyletic taxa unless we also include birds.

FIGURE 34.21 compares the classical classification of the amniotes with three of several alternatives that are based on strict application of cladistic conventions, in which each taxon must represent a monophyletic group. The classical taxonomy (FIGURE 34.21a) divides the amniotes into three classes, Reptilia, Aves (birds), and Mammalia. It is a classification that highlights the distinctive adaptations that evolved in the avian (bird) lineage. However, another look at the cladogram in FIGURE 34.20 will reinforce the point made earlier that the traditional class Reptilia is paraphyletic because it does not include the birds. Researchers have proposed various cladistics-based alternatives for placing the birds in the taxonomy of amniotes. These options illustrate an enduring difference of taxonomic preference, between "lumpers," who prefer to minimize the number of taxa at each taxonomic level, and "splitters," who prefer a finer-grained taxonomy having more taxa at each level. In the most extreme lumpers' version of amniote classification, the bird problem is solved by simply including birds in the class Reptilia (FIGURE 34.21b). In one splitters' version, class Aves is preserved by also granting class status to other clades of reptiles (FIGURE 34.21c, which includes only extant groups). Another alternative identifies the two major diapsid branches as taxonomic classes, Lepidosauria and Archosauria (FIGURE 34.21d).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 34-21. Taxonomic classes of amniotes. Many zoologists prefer the classical taxonomy, which is pragmatic, though it breaks from the strict cladistic requirement that named taxa must be monophyletic groups. The turtles are omitted from alternative (d) because their phylogeny is still uncertain.

Whichever classification your instructor prefers, "reptile" is still a useful informal category for discussing all the amniotes except the birds and mammals. We will also take the liberty of extending the "reptile" appellation to include the fossilized animals of the earliest amniote radiation, which branched from an amphibian ancestor. In other words, all modern amniotes, including mammals and birds, evolved from forms that most of us would probably call "reptiles" if we saw them walking around today.




