
 Flowers are specialized shoots bearing the reproductive organs of the angiosperm sporophyte

Flowers, the reproductive shoots of the angiosperm sporophyte, are typically composed of four whorls of highly modified leaves called floral organs, which are separated by very short internodes. Unlike vegetative shoots, which grow indeterminately, flowers are determinate shoots, meaning that they cease growing once the flower and fruit are formed.

The four kinds of floral organs, in sequence from the outside to the inside of the flower, are the sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels. Their site of attachment to the stem is the receptacle (FIGURE 38.2). Stamens and carpels are the male and female reproductive organs, respectively, whereas sepals and petals are nonreproductive organs. Sepals, which enclose and protect the floral bud before it opens, are usually green and more leaflike in appearance than the other floral organs. In many angiosperms, the petals are more brightly colored than sepals and advertise the flower to insects and other pollinators.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 38-2. Review of an idealized flower.

A stamen consists of a stalk called the filament and a terminal structure called the anther; within the anther are chambers called pollen sacs, in which pollen is produced. A carpel has an ovary at its base and a slender neck called the style. At the top of the style is a sticky structure called the stigma that serves as a landing platform for pollen. Within the ovary are one or more ovules (the number depends on the species). The flower shown in FIGURE 38.2 has a single carpel, but the flowers of many species have multiple carpels. In some species, several carpels are fused into a single structure; the result is an ovary with two or more chambers, each containing one or more ovules.

The stamen and carpels of flowers contain the sporangia, the structures where first the spores and then the gametophytes develop. The male gametophytes are sperm-producing structures called pollen grains, which form within the pollen sacs of anthers. The female gametophytes are egg-producing structures called embryo sacs, which form within the ovules in ovaries.

For the egg within the embryo sac to be fertilized, the male and female gametophytes must meet and their gametes must unite. Pollination occurs when pollen released from anthers and carried by wind or animals lands on a stigma (not necessarily on the same flower or plant). Each pollen grain produces a structure called a pollen tube, which grows down into the ovary via the style and discharges sperm into the embryo sac, resulting in fertilization of the egg (see FIGURE 38.1). The zygote gives rise to an embryo, and as the embryo grows, the ovule that contains it develops into a seed. The entire ovary, meanwhile, develops into a fruit containing one or more seeds, depending on the species. Fruits, carried by wind or by animals, help disperse seeds some distance from their source plants. If deposited in sufficiently moist soil, seeds germinate; that is, their embryos start growing into seedlings, a new generation of flowering sporophytes.

Numerous floral variations have evolved during the 130 million years of angiosperm history (FIGURE 38.3, p. 786). In certain flowers, one or more of the four basic floral organs--sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels--have been eliminated. Plant biologists distinguish between complete flowers, those having all four organs, and incomplete flowers, those lacking one or more of the four floral parts. For example, most grasses have incomplete flowers lacking petals.

a.

b.

c.

d.

e.

f.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 38-3. A few examples of floral diversity. (a) Trillium. This Trillium flower is complete, meaning that sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels are all present. (b) Lupines. Lupines are examples of plants with inflorescences, clusters of flowers. (c) Sunflowers. What appears in this sunflower to be a single flower is actually a collection of hundreds. The central disk of this composite inflorescence consists of tiny complete flowers. What appear to be petals ringing the central disk are actually imperfect flowers called ray flowers. (d) Hibiscus. The diverse shapes, colors, and odors of flowers also reflect adaptations to different modes of pollination. For example, Hibiscus pollinators include hummingbirds, which are attracted to the red color. (e) Maize. Maize is a monoecious species with inflorescences of carpellate (female) and staminate (male) flowers on the same individual plant. An "ear" of maize is a collection of kernels (one-seeded fruits) that develops from an inflorescence of fertilized carpellate flowers. The maize "silk" is composed of numerous long styles (left). The staminate inflorescences are the tassels (right). (f) Sagittaria. Sagittaria is dioecious, its staminate (left) and carpellate (right) flowers on separate plants.

The presence or absence of reproductive organs further distinguishes flowers. A bisexual flower (in older terminology termed a "perfect" flower) is equipped with both stamens and carpels. Complete flowers such as the Trillium shown in FIGURE 38.3a are always bisexual, because they have all four types of floral organs, but an incomplete flower that lacks sepals or petals may also be bisexual.

A unisexual flower (or "imperfect" flower in older terminology) is missing either stamens or carpels. Unisexual flowers are called staminate or carpellate, depending on which set of reproductive organs is present. If staminate and carpellate flowers are located on the same individual plant, then that plant species is said to be monoecious (from a Greek word meaning "one house"). Maize and other corn varieties are examples. The "ears" of a maize plant are derived from clusters of carpellate flowers, while the tassels consist of staminate flowers (FIGURE 38.3e). In contrast, a dioecious ("two houses") species, such as Sagittaria, has staminate flowers and carpellate flowers on separate plants (FIGURE 38.3f). Date palms are dioecious. Because dates develop only on the carpellate (female) palms, commercial date growers plant mostly carpellate individuals. A few staminate male plants provide enough pollen for hundreds of females.

In addition to these differences based on the presence of floral organs, flowers have many variations in size, shape, and color (see FIGURE 38.3). Much of this diversity represents adaptations of flowers to different animal pollinators. Indeed, the presence of animals in the environment was a key factor in angiosperm evolution (see Chapter 30).

The following concepts describe the development of angiosperm gametophytes, then trace how pollination leads to fertilization and the development of embryos, seeds, and fruits. Keep in mind, however, that there are many variations in the details of these processes, depending on the species of flowering plant.




