
 Evolutionary fitness is the relative contribution an individual makes to the gene pool of the next generation

The phrases "struggle for existence" and "survival of the fittest" are misleading if we take them to mean direct competitive contests among individuals. There are animal species in which individuals, usually the males, lock horns or otherwise do combat to determine mating privilege. But reproductive success is generally more subtle and passive. A barnacle may produce more eggs than its neighbors because it is more efficient at collecting food from the water. In a population of moths, certain variants may average more offspring than others because their body and wing colors hide them from predators better. Plants in a wildflower population may differ in reproductive success because some are better able to attract pollinators, owing to slight variations in flower color, shape, or fragrance. These examples point to a biological definition of fitness: Darwinian fitness is the contribution an individual makes to the gene pool of the next generation relative to the contributions of other individuals.

In a more quantitative approach to natural selection, population geneticists define relative fitness as the contribution of a genotype to the next generation compared to the contributions of alternative genotypes for the same locus. For example, consider our wildflower population, in which RR and Rr plants have red flowers and rr plants have white flowers. Let's assume that, on average, individuals with red flowers produce more offspring than those with white flowers. The relative fitness of the most reproductively successful variants is set at 1 as a basis for comparison; so in this case, the relative fitness of an RR or Rr plant is 1. If plants with white flowers average only 80%  as many offspring, their relative fitness is 0.8.

Survival alone does not guarantee reproductive success. Relative fitness is zero for a sterile plant or animal, even if it is robust and outlives other members of the population. But, of course, survival is a prerequisite for reproducing, and longevity increases fitness if it results in certain individuals leaving more descendants than other individuals leave. Then again, an individual that matures quickly and becomes fertile at an early age may have a greater reproductive potential than individuals that live longer but mature late. Thus, many factors that affect both survival and fertility determine an individual's evolutionary fitness.

An organism exposes its phenotype--its physical traits, metabolism, physiology, and behavior--not its genotype, to the environment. Acting on phenotypes, selection indirectly adapts a population to its environment by increasing or maintaining favorable genotypes in the gene pool.

The entity subjected to natural selection is the whole or ganism, which is an integrated composite of its many phenotypic features, not a collage of individual parts. Thus, the relative fitness of an allele depends on the entire genetic context in which it works. For example, alleles that enhance the growth of the trunk and limbs of a tree may be useless or even detrimental in the absence of alleles at other loci that enhance the growth of roots required to support the tree. On the other hand, alleles that contribute nothing to an organism's success, or may even be slightly maladaptive, may be perpetuated because they are present in individuals whose overall fitness is high. The whole baseball team wins the league pennant, even the player with the worst batting average and the most errors.




