
 Skeletons support and protect the animal body and are essential to movement

The three functions of a skeleton are support, protection, and movement. Most land animals would sag from their own weight if they had no skeleton to support them. Even an animal living in water would be a formless mass with no framework to maintain its shape. Many animals have hard skeletons that protect soft tissues. For example, the vertebrate skull protects the brain, and the ribs form a cage around the heart, lungs, and other internal organs. And skeletons aid in movement by giving muscles something firm to work against. There are three main types of skeletons: hydrostatic skeletons, exoskeletons, and endoskeletons.

Hydrostatic Skeletons

A hydrostatic skeleton consists of fluid held under pressure in a closed body compartment. This is the main type of skeleton in most cnidarians, flatworms, nematodes, and annelids (see Chapter 33). These animals control their form and movement by using muscles to change the shape of the fluid-filled compartments. Among the cnidarians, for example, a hydra can elongate by closing its mouth and using contractile cells in the body wall to constrict the central gastrovascular cavity. Because water cannot be compressed very much, decreasing the diameter of the cavity forces it to increase in length. In flatworms (planarians), the interstitial fluid is kept under pressure and functions as the main hydrostatic skeleton. Planarian movement results mainly from muscles in the body wall exerting localized forces against the hydrostatic skeleton. Roundworms (nematodes) hold the fluid in the body cavity (a pseudocoelom; see FIGURE 32.6b) at a high pressure, and contractions of longitudinal muscles result in thrashing movements. In earthworms and other annelids, the coelomic fluid functions as a hydrostatic skeleton. The coelomic cavity is divided by septa between the segments of the worm, and thus the animal can change the shape of each segment individually, using both circular and longitudinal muscles. The hydrostatic skeleton enables earthworms and most other annelids to move by peristalsis, a type of locomotion produced by rhythmic waves of muscle contractions passing from head to tail (FIGURE 49.27, p. 1078).

Hydrostatic skeletons are well suited for life in aquatic environments. They may cushion internal organs from shocks and provide support for crawling and burrowing. However, a hydrostatic skeleton cannot support the forms of terrestrial locomotion in which an animal's body is held off the ground, such as walking or running.

Exoskeletons

An exoskeleton is a hard encasement deposited on the surface of an animal. For example, most mollusks are enclosed in calcareous (calcium carbonate) shells secreted by the mantle, a sheetlike extension of the body wall (see FIGURE 33.16). As the animal grows, it enlarges the diameter of the shell by adding to its outer edge. Clams and other bivalves close their hinged shells using muscles attached to the inside of this exoskeleton.

The jointed exoskeleton typical of arthropods is a cuticle, a nonliving coat secreted by the epidermis. Muscles are attached to knobs and plates of the cuticle that extend into the interior of the body. About 30-50%  of the cuticle consists of chitin, a polysaccharide similar to cellulose. Fibrils of chitin are embedded in a matrix made of protein, forming a composite material that combines strength and flexibility. Where protection is most important, the cuticle is hardened with organic compounds that cross-link the proteins of the exoskeleton. Some crustaceans, such as lobsters, harden portions of their exoskeletons even more by adding calcium salts. In contrast, at the joints of the legs, where the cuticle must be thin and flexible, there is only a small amount of inorganic salts and little cross-linking of proteins. The exoskeleton of an arthropod must periodically be shed (molted) and replaced by a larger case with each spurt of growth by the animal (see FIGURE 5.9).

Endoskeletons

An endoskeleton consists of hard supporting elements, such as bones, buried within the soft tissues of an animal. Sponges are reinforced by hard spicules consisting of inorganic material or by softer fibers made of protein (see FIGURE 33.3). Echinoderms have an endoskeleton of hard plates beneath the skin. These ossicles are composed of magnesium carbonate and calcium carbonate crystals, and the separate plates are usually bound together by protein fibers. Sea urchins have a skeleton of tightly bound ossicles, but the ossicles of sea stars are more loosely bound, allowing the animal to change the shape of its arms (see FIGURE 33.38).

Chordates have endoskeletons consisting of cartilage, bone, or some combination of these materials (see FIGURE 40.2). The mammalian skeleton is built from more than 200 bones, some fused together and others connected at joints by ligaments that allow freedom of movement (FIGURE 49.28). Anatomists divide the vertebrate frame into an axial skeleton, consisting of the skull, vertebral column (backbone), and rib cage, and an appendicular skeleton, made up of limb bones and the pectoral and pelvic girdles that anchor the appendages to the axial skeleton. In each appendage, several types of joints provide flexibility for body movement and locomotion.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 49-28. The human skeleton. (a) The axial skeleton (green) provides an axis of support for the upright (bipedal) body and surrounds and protects the brain, spinal cord, lungs, and heart. The appendicular skeleton (gold) supports the arms and legs. Circled numbers indicate locations of different types of joints, described in part b. (b) Joints allow great flexibility in body movement, indicated by arrows. Hinge and pivot joints between bones in our wrists and hands enable us to make precise manipulations.




