
 Osmoregulators expend energy to control their internal osmolarity; osmoconformers are isoosmotic with their surroundings

There are two basic solutions to the problem of balancing water gain with water loss. One--available only to marine animals--is to be isoosmotic to the surroundings. Such an animal, which does not actively adjust its internal osmolarity, is known as an osmoconformer. Because an osmoconformer's internal osmolarity is the same as that of its environment, there is no tendency to gain or lose water. Although they do not compensate for changes in external osmolarity, osmoconformers often live in water that has a very stable composition and hence have a very constant internal osmolarity. In contrast, an osmoregulator is an animal that must control its internal osmolarity, because its body fluids are not isoosmotic with the outside environment. An osmoregulator must discharge excess water if it lives in a hypoosmotic environment or take in water to offset osmotic loss if it inhabits a hyperosmotic environment. Osmoregulation enables animals to live in environments that are uninhabitable for osmoconformers, such as freshwater and terrestrial habitats, and allows many marine animals to maintain internal osmolarities different from that of seawater.

Whenever animals maintain an osmolarity difference between the body and the external environment, osmoregulation has an energy cost. Because diffusion tends to equalize concentrations in a system, osmoregulators must expend energy to maintain the osmotic gradients that allow water to move in or out. They do so by using active transport to manipulate solute concentrations in their body fluids.

The energy cost of osmoregulation depends mainly on how different an animal's osmolarity is from its surroundings, how easily water and solutes can move across the animal's surface, and on how much membrane-transport work is required to pump solutes. Because of the difference in concentration between cytoplasm, fresh water (1-50 mosm/L), and seawater, osmoregulation accounts for nearly 5%  of the resting metabolic rate of many marine and freshwater bony fishes. For brine shrimp, small crustaceans that live in the Great Salt Lake in Utah and in other extremely salty lakes, the gradient between internal and external osmolarities is very large and the cost of osmoregulation is correspondingly high--as much as 30%  of the resting metabolic rate.

Most animals, whether osmoconformers or osmoregulators, cannot tolerate substantial changes in external osmolarity and are said to be stenohaline (Gr. stenos, "narrow"; haline refers to salt). In contrast, euryhaline animals (Gr. eurys, "broad")--which include both certain osmoconformers and certain osmoregulators--can survive large fluctuations of external osmolarity. Familiar examples of euryhaline osmoregulators are the various species of salmon. A more extreme example is a bony fish called tilapia (a native of Africa grown widely for human food), which can adjust to any salt concentration between fresh water and 2,000 mosm/L (twice that of seawater).

Next, we'll take a closer look at some of the adaptations for osmoregulation that have evolved in marine, freshwater, and terrestrial animals.

Maintaining Water Balance in the Sea

Animals first evolved in the sea, and more animal phyla are found there than in any other environment. Most marine invertebrates are osmoconformers, as are the hagfishes (jawless vertebrates). Their total osmolarity (the sum of the concentrations of all dissolved substances) is the same as seawater. However, they differ considerably from seawater in their concentrations of most specific solutes. Thus, even an animal that conforms to the osmolarity of its surroundings does regulate its internal composition.

Except for the hagfishes, marine vertebrates are osmoregulators. For most of these animals, the ocean is a strongly dehydrating environment because it is much saltier than internal fluids and water tends to be lost from the body by osmosis. Marine fishes (class Osteichthyes) constantly lose water through their skin and especially their gills (FIGURE 44.14a, p. 940). To balance these water losses, these fishes obtain water in food and by drinking large amounts of seawater. The accompanying salt intake (along with salt that enters the body by diffusion) is disposed of by active transport out of the gills. Very little urine is produced, an adaptation that conserves water.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 44-14. Osmoregulation in marine and freshwater bony fishes: a comparison.

Marine sharks and most other cartilaginous fishes (class Chondrichthyes) use a different osmoregulatory "strategy." Like bony fishes, their internal salt concentration is much less than that of seawater, so in addition to salt intake in food, salt tends to diffuse into the body (especially across the gills). The kidneys of sharks remove some of this salt load, and the rest is excreted by an organ called the rectal gland or is lost in feces. Unlike bony fishes, and despite relatively low internal salt concentration, marine sharks do not experience a large and continuous osmotic water loss. The explanation is that sharks maintain high concentrations of urea in their body fluids, along with another organic solute, trimethylamine oxide (TMAO), which protects proteins from damage by urea. (If you have ever prepared shark meat, you know it should be soaked in fresh water to remove urea before cooking.) The total solute concentration of body fluids (salts, urea, TMAO, and other compounds) is somewhat greater than 1,000 mosm/L and therefore slightly hyperosmotic to seawater. Consequently, water slowly enters the shark's body by osmosis and in food (sharks do not drink), and this small influx of water is disposed of in urine produced by the kidneys.

Maintaining Osmotic Balance in Fresh Water

The osmoregulatory problems of freshwater animals are opposite those of marine animals. Freshwater animals are constantly gaining water by osmosis and losing salts by diffusion because the osmolarity of their internal fluids is much higher than that of their surroundings. Freshwater protists such as Amoeba and Paramecium have contractile vacuoles that pump out excess water (see FIGURE 28.14). Many freshwater animals, including fishes, maintain water balance by excreting large amounts of very dilute urine and manage their salt budget by regaining lost salts in food and by active uptake from their surroundings (FIGURE 44.14b).

Salmon and other euryhaline fishes that migrate between seawater and fresh water undergo dramatic and rapid changes in osmoregulatory status. While in the ocean, salmon osmoregulate like other marine fishes by drinking seawater and excreting excess salt from the gills. When they migrate to fresh water, salmon cease drinking, begin to produce lots of dilute urine, and their gills start taking up salt from the dilute environment--just like fishes that spend their entire lives in fresh water.

Special Problems of Living in Temporary Waters

Dehydration dooms most animals, but some aquatic invertebrates living in temporary ponds and films of water around soil particles can lose almost all their body water and survive in a dormant state when their habitats dry up. This remarkable adaptation is called anhydrobiosis ("life without water"). Among the most striking examples are the tardigrades, or water bears, tiny invertebrates less than 1 mm long (FIGURE 44.15). In their active, hydrated state, these animals contain about 85%  water by weight but can dehydrate to less than 2%  water and survive in an inactive state, dry as dust, for a decade or more. Just add water, and within minutes the rehydrated tardigrades are moving about and feeding.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 44-15. Anhydrobiosis. Tardigrades (water bears) inhabit temporary ponds and droplets of water in soil and on moist plants (SEMs).

Anhydrobiotic animals must have adaptations that keep cell membranes intact. Researchers are just beginning to learn how tardigrades survive drying out, but studies of anhydrobiotic roundworms (class Nematoda) show that dehydrated individuals contain large amounts of sugars, especially a disaccharide called trehalose. Consisting of two glucose units, trehalose seems to protect the cells by replacing the water associated with membranes and proteins. Many insects that survive freezing in the winter also utilize trehalose as a membrane protectant.

Maintaining Osmotic Balance on Land

The threat of desiccation is perhaps the largest regulatory problem confronting terrestrial plants and animals. Humans die if they lose about 12%  of their body water (mammals that evolved in dry enviroments, such as camels, can withstand about twice that level of dehydration). The severity of this challenge may be one reason only arthropods and vertebrates have colonized the land with great success (other phyla have terrestrial representatives, but most of their species are aquatic).

Adaptations that reduce water loss are key to survival on land. Much as a waxy cuticle contributes to the success of land plants, most terrestrial animals have body coverings that help prevent dehydration. Examples are the waxy layers of insect exoskeletons, the shells of land snails, and the multiple layers of dead, keratinized skin cells covering most terrestrial vertebrates. Many terrestrial animals, especially desert dwellers, are nocturnal; this reduces evaporative water loss by taking advantage of the lower temperatures and higher relative humidity of night air.

Despite these adaptations, most terrestrial animals lose considerable water from moist surfaces in their gas exchange organs, in urine and feces, and across the skin. Land animals balance their water budgets by drinking and eating moist foods and by using metabolic water (the water produced in mitochondria during cellular respiration). Some animals are so well adapted for minimizing water loss that they can survive in deserts without drinking. For example, many insect-eating desert birds and reptiles do not drink. Kangaroo rats lose so little water that they can recover 90%  of the loss by using metabolic water (FIGURE 44.16), gaining the remaining 10%  from the small amount of water in their diet of seeds.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 44-16. Water balance in two terrestrial mammals. Kangaroo rats, which live in the American southwest, eat mostly dry seeds and do not drink water. A kangaroo rat loses water mainly by evaporation during gas exchange and gains water mainly from cellular metabolism. In contrast, a human loses a large amount of water in urine, and regains it mostly in food and drink.




