
 Trophic structure is a key factor in community dynamics

The dynamics and structure of a community depend to a large extent on the feeding relationships between organisms--the trophic structure of the community. The transfer of food energy from its source in plants and other photosynthetic organisms (primary producers) through herbivores (primary consumers) to carnivores (secondary and tertiary consumers) and eventually to decomposers is referred to as a food chain. In the 1920s, Oxford biologist Charles Elton first pointed out that the length of a food chain is usually limited to four or five links, or trophic levels (FIGURE 53.10). Elton also recognized that food chains are not isolated units but are hooked together into food webs.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 53-10. Examples of terrestrial and marine food chains. The arrows trace energy and nutrients that pass through the trophic levels of a community when organisms feed on one another. Decomposers (detritivores) are not shown here.

Food Webs

Who eats whom in a community? An ecologist can summarize the trophic relationships of a community by diagramming a food web with arrows linking species according to their trophic relationship. For example, FIGURE 53.11 is a simplified food web for an Antarctic pelagic community found in the seasonally productive Southern Ocean. The dominant herbivores in the Antarctic are euphausids (krill, which are crustaceans) and herbivorous plankton such as copepods. These zooplankton species are in turn eaten by various carnivores, including penguins, seals, fish, and baleen whales. Squid, which are carnivores that feed on fish as well as zooplankton, are another important link in these food chains, as they are in turn eaten by seals and toothed whales. During the whaling years, humans became the top predator of this food chain. Having reduced the whales to low numbers, humans are now harvesting at lower trophic levels, including the fishing for krill.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 53-11. An antarctic marine food web. Arrows follow the transfer of food from the producers (phytoplankton) through the trophic levels. As in FIGURE 53.10, this diagram omits decomposers, which "feed" at all trophic levels. Blue arrows indicate the major trophic interactions.

What transforms food chains into food webs? First, a given species may weave into the web at more than one trophic level. For example, male horseflies feed as primary consumers on nectar and plant juices, whereas the females are bloodsucking ectoparasites that feed as secondary or even tertiary consumers. Second, most consumers are nonexclusive. For example, foxes are omnivores with diets that include berries and other plant materials, herbivores such as mice, and other predators, such as weasels. Humans are among the most versatile of omnivores.

Food webs can be very complicated, but we can simplify them in two ways. First, we can group species into fairly broad taxonomic groups if their trophic relationships in a community are similar. For example, in FIGURE 53.11, over 100 phytoplankton species are combined in one "functional group," that of primary consumers in the food web. A second way to simplify a food web is to isolate a part of the web that interacts very little with the rest of the community. FIGURE 53.12 illustrates a partial food web for sea nettles (jellies) and juvenile striped bass in Chesapeake Bay. This partial food web can be "pulled out" from a more complex web because these species interact very little with the rest of the community in terms of feeding relationships. Note that sea nettles are secondary consumers of zooplankton and tertiary consumers of fish larvae, which themselves are secondary consumers of zooplankton.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 53-12. Partial food web for the Chesapeake Bay estuary on the U.S. Atlantic coast. The sea nettle (Chrysaora quinquecirrha) and juvenile striped bass (Morone saxatilis) are the main predators of fish larvae (bay anchovy and several other species).

Animals at successive trophic levels in a food chain tend to be larger with each link (except for parasites). There are upper and lower limits to the size of food a carnivorous animal can eat. The size of an animal and its feeding mechanism puts some upper limit on the size of food it can take into its mouth. And except in a few cases, large carnivores cannot live on very small food items because they cannot procure enough food in a given time to meet their metabolic needs. Among the exceptions are baleen whales, huge suspension feeders with adaptations that enable them to consume enormous quantities of krill and other small organisms (see FIGURE 41.6).

What Limits the Length of a Food Chain?

Each food chain we can identify in a food web is only a few links long. For example, in the Antarctic web of FIGURE 53.11, there are only four or five links from the producers to any top-level predators. In fact, for all the food webs that ecologists have studied so far, most chains have five or fewer links, although a few are as long as nine links.

Why are food chains relatively short? There are two main hypotheses. The energetic hypothesis is the most widely accepted explanation for food chain length. It suggests that the length of a food chain is limited by the inefficiency of energy transfer along the chain. As we will see in the next chapter, only about 10%  of the energy stored in the organic matter of any trophic level is converted to organic matter at the next trophic level. If we start with 100 kg of plant material, we can support about 10 kg of herbivore production and 1 kg of carnivore production. If this energetic hypothesis is correct, food chains should be longer in habitats of higher photosynthetic productivity, a prediction that can be tested.

A second hypothesis to explain the limited length of food chains is the dynamic stability hypothesis. According to this idea, long food chains are less stable than short chains. Fluctuations at lower trophic levels are magnified at higher levels, potentially causing the extinction of top predators. In a variable environment, top predators must be able to recover from environmental shocks (such as extreme winters) that can reduce the food supply, from producers all the way up the food chain. The longer the food chain, the slower the recovery rate from environmental setbacks for top predators. This hypothesis predicts shorter food chains in unpredictable environments, and this prediction can again be tested by the collection of food chain data.

Most of the data available support the energetic hypothesis as the likely explanation for the shortness of food chains. For example, ecologists have used tree-hole communities in tropical forests as experimental models to test the energetic hypothesis. Many trees have small branch scars that rot to form small holes in the tree trunk. Tree holes hold water and provide habitat for tiny communities sustained by the leaf litter trapped by the water. FIGURE 53.13 shows the results of a set of experiments in which productivity (leaf litter falling into the tree holes) was manipulated. As predicted by the energetic hypothesis, holes with the most leaf litter, and hence the greatest total food supply at the producer level, supported the longest food chains.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 53-13. Test of the energetic hypothesis for the restriction on food chain length. Researchers manipulated the productivity of tree-hole communities in Queensland, Australia, with leaf litter input at three levels: high litter input = natural (control) rate of litter fall; medium = 1/10 natural rate; and low = 1/100 natural rate. Reducing energy input reduced food chain length, a result consistent with the energetic hypothesis. The tree-hole community consists of microbes that break down leaf litter, mosquito larvae that feed on these microbes, predatory midges (chironomids), and other insects that feed directly on leaf litter.




