
 Lysosomes are digestive compartments

A lysosome is a membrane-bounded sac of hydrolytic enzymes that the cell uses to digest macromolecules (FIGURE 7.13). There are lysosomal enzymes that can hydrolyze proteins, polysaccharides, fats, and nucleic acids--all the major classes of macromolecules. These enzymes work best in an acidic environment, at about pH 5. The lysosomal membrane maintains this low internal pH by pumping hydrogen ions from the cytosol into the lumen of the lysosome. If a lysosome breaks open or leaks its contents, the released enzymes are not very active, because the cytosol has a neutral pH. However, excessive leakage from a large number of lysosomes can destroy a cell by autodigestion. From this example we can see once again how important compartmental organization is to the functions of the cell: The lysosome provides a space where the cell can digest macromolecules safely, without the general destruction that would occur if hydrolytic enzymes roamed at large.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 7-13. Lysosomes. (a) In this white blood cell from a rat, the lysosomes are very dark because of a specific stain that reacts with one of the products of digestion within the lysosome. This type of white blood cell ingests bacteria and viruses and destroys them in the lysosomes (TEM). (b) In the cytoplasm of this rat liver cell, an autophagic lysosome has engulfed two disabled organelles, a mitochondrion and a peroxisome (TEM).

Hydrolytic enzymes and lysosomal membrane are made by rough ER and then transferred to the Golgi apparatus for further processing. At least some lysosomes probably arise by budding from the trans face of the Golgi apparatus (FIGURE 7.14, p. 122). Proteins of the inner surface of the lysosomal membrane and the digestive enzymes themselves are probably spared from destruction by having three-dimensional conformations that protect vulnerable bonds from enzymatic attack.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 7-14. The formation and functions of lysosomes. The ER and Golgi apparatus generally cooperate in the production of lysosomes containing active hydrolytic enzymes. Lysosomes digest (hydrolyze) materials taken into the cell and recycle materials from intracellular refuse. This figure shows one lysosome fusing with a food vacuole and another engulfing a damaged mitochondrion.

Lysosomes carry out intracellular digestion in a variety of circumstances. Amoebas and many other protists eat by engulfing smaller organisms or other food particles, a process called phagocytosis (from the Greek phagein, to eat, and kytos, vessel, referring here to the cell). The food vacuole formed in this way then fuses with a lysosome, whose enzymes digest the food (see FIGURE 7.14). Digestion products, including simple sugars, amino acids, and other monomers, pass into the cytosol and become nutrients for the cell. Some human cells also carry out phagocytosis. Among them are macrophages, cells that help defend the body by destroying bacteria and other invaders (see FIGURE 7.13a).

Lysosomes also use their hydrolytic enzymes to recycle the cell's own organic material, a process called autophagy.This occurs when a lysosome engulfs another organelle or a small amount of cytosol (see FIGURE 7.13b). The lysosomal enzymes dismantle the ingested material, and the organic monomers are returned to the cytosol for reuse. With the help of lysosomes, the cell continually renews itself. A human liver cell, for example, recycles half of its macromolecules each week.

Programmed destruction of cells by their own lysosomal enzymes is important in the development of many multicellular organisms. During the transforming of a tadpole into a frog, for instance, lysosomes in the cells of the tail destroy these cells. And the hands of human embryos are webbed until lysosomes digest the tissue between the fingers.

A variety of inherited disorders called lysosomal storage diseases affect lysosomal metabolism. A person afflicted with a storage disease lacks a functioning version of a hydrolytic enzyme normally present in lysosomes. The lysosomes become engorged with indigestible substrates, which begin to interfere with other cellular activities. In Pompe's disease, for example, the liver is damaged by an accumulation of glycogen due to the absence of a lysosomal enzyme needed to break down that polysaccharide. In Tay-Sachs disease, a lipid-digesting enzyme is missing or inactive, and the brain becomes impaired by an accumulation of lipids in the cells. Fortunately, storage diseases are rare in the general population. In the future, it may be possible to cure such a disorder by inserting genes (DNA) for the missing enzyme into the appropriate cells (see Chapter 20).




