
 Research on neuron development and neural stem cells may lead to new approaches for treating CNS injuries and diseases

Unlike the peripheral nervous system, the mammalian central nervous system cannot repair itself when damaged or assaulted by disease. The human brain can make new connections between surviving neurons and thus sometimes compensate for damage, as in the remarkable recoveries of some stroke victims. Generally speaking, however, spinal cord injuries, strokes, brain injuries, and diseases that destroy brain cells, such as Parkinson's and Alzheimer-s, have devastating effects. Current research on nerve cell development and the discovery of neural stem cells enhance our fundamental knowledge of the nervous system and may one day make it possible for physicians to repair or replace damaged neurons.

Nerve Cell Development

One of the key questions in neurobiology is how certain cells in a developing animal differentiate into neurons, migrate to their proper location, grow axons to specific places, and make synapses with the proper target cells. How is this accomplished without ending up with a useless tangle of neurons? The labs of Corey Goodman (University of California, Berkeley) and Marc Tessier-Lavigne (University of California, San Francisco) study how neurons find their way during development of the central nervous system. Their work combines elements of cell-to-cell communication (Chapter 11), control of gene expression (Chapter 19), and the genetic basis of development (Chapter 21).

To reach their target cells, axons must grow anywhere from a few microns up to a meter in length (for example, from the human spinal cord to the foot). Axons do not follow a straight path from point A to point B; rather, molecular signposts along the way direct and redirect the growing axon in a series of mid-course corrections that result in a meandering, but not random, trek. The responsive region at the leading edge of the growing axon is called the growth cone. Signal molecules released by target cells bind to receptors on the plasma membrane of the growth cone, triggering a signal-transduction pathway (FIGURE 48.28). The response of the axon may be to grow toward the source of the signal molecules (attraction) or grow away from the source (repulsion). Cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) on the axon's growth cone also play a role; they attach to complementary cell adhesion molecules on surrounding cells that provide tracks for the growing axon to follow. Nerve growth factor released by astrocytes and growth-promoting proteins produced by the neurons themselves contribute to the process by stimulating growth of axons.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-28. How do developing axons know which way to go? The region at the leading edge of a developing axon is called the growth cone; this area displays various receptors and cell adhesion molecules that bind to guidance signals from surrounding cells. This figure illustrates a few of the factors involved in axon guidance. In the examples shown here, (a) interneurons are induced to cross the midline of the spinal cord whereas (b) motor neurons are induced to grow away from the spinal cord, eventually to synapse with muscle or gland cells.

Goodman, Tessier-Lavigne, and their colleagues have found the genes, gene products, and process of axon guidance to be remarkably similar in nematode worms (C. elegans), insects (Drosophila), and vertebrates, indicating evolutionary conservation of the genes and basic mechanism for this complex process.

Development occurs in a space and time sequence that would seem difficult to replicate in order to repair or replace neurons in humans with damaged nervous systems. The growing axon expresses different genes at different times during its development, and is influenced by surrounding cells that it moves away from. Work continues on deciphering these developmental mechanisms, however, with the ultimate goal of repairing damaged neurological tissue. Using the right combination of attractants, repellants, growth-associated proteins, and growth factors, researchers hope to coax damaged axons to regrow, following the correct pathway and forming connections with the correct targets.

Neural Stem Cells

Until 1998, it was "common knowledge" that you were born with all the brain cells you would ever have. In that year, however, Fred Gage (Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California) and Peter Ericksson (Sahlgrenska University Hospital, G&ouml;teborg, Sweden) made a startling announcement: the human brain does produce new nerve cells in adulthood. Newly-divided cells were found in the hippocampus, an area of the brain involved with memory and learning (see FIGURE 48.27). It is not clear what function these new cells play in the human brain. However, mice that live in stimulating environments and run on exercise wheels have more new brain cells in their hippocampus and perform better on learning tasks than genetically-identical mice who live in standard cages. Perhaps people can also improve their brain capacity by stimulating their minds and exercising their bodies, resulting in a greater capacity for learning.

The discovery of young brain cells in adult brains came about because of a bit of scientific serendipity and the generosity of some terminally ill cancer patients. Ericksson had been on sabbatical in Gage's lab, where the chemical marker bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) was injected in mice to label the DNA of dividing cells. In a postmortem study, the brains of the mice were examined for new brain cells, which were identified by the marker. After Ericksson returned to Sweden for clinical work, he was on call with a cancer specialist who happened to mention that a group of terminally ill cancer patients was being given bromodeoxyuridine as part of a study to monitor tumor growth. Ericksson recognized this substance as the marker being used to look for new brain cells in the Gage lab. The patients agreed to donate their brains to science upon their death, and new neurons were found in all the patients.

Mature brain cells, with their extensive processes and intricate connections to other cells, clearly are not able to undergo cell division. Therefore, the new brain cells must have come from stem cells. Recall from Chapter 21 that stem cells are relatively unspecialized cells that continually divide. Some offspring cells may differentiate into specialized cells under the right conditions, while cell division retains a supply of undifferentiated cells.

One of the difficulties of conducting research on stem cells is finding a source of human stem cells. Various ethical and political issues surround the use of embryonic stem cells. In addition to the stem cells of an early embryo, certain tissues of an adult also have stem cells, though they may be less developmentally versatile than embryonic stem cells. For example, the bone marrow has stem cells that can differentiate into the various kinds of blood cells (see FIGURE 42.15). The existence of stem cells in the brain, however, is an exciting surprise.

In May 2001, Gage and his colleagues announced that they had cultured neural progenitor cells from the brains of recently-deceased individuals and surgical tissue samples. The term "progenitor" refers to the fact that these stem cells are committed to becoming nerve cells; they are not as "plastic" as embryonic stem cells. In the lab, the neural progenitor cells divided 30-70 times and differentiated into neurons and astrocytes (FIGURE 48.29). Gage noted, "These results confirm that the adult human brain contains cells that can continue to divide and differentiate."



Click image to enlarge



Fig 48-29. Neural progenitor cell. This progenitor cell from the spinal cord has been stained to show the nucleus (green) and plasma membrane (red). The condensed chromosomes are aligned at the metaphase plate in the nucleus, indicating that the cell is undergoing mitosis.

One of the goals of further research is to find a way to induce the body's own neural progenitor cells to differentiate into glia or specific types of neurons when and where they are needed. Also, cultured neural progenitor cells could be transplanted into damaged neurological tissue.

In addition to the studies we-ve described here, many other researchers are exploring various approaches to preventing and treating central nervous system disorders and injuries.

In the next chapter we examine in more detail the input and output elements of the nervous system--sensory receptors and motor effectors.




