
 Alveolata: The alveolates are unicellular protists with subsurface cavities (alveoli)

Another protistan clade that is emerging from molecular systematics, Alveolata, draws together a group of flagellates (the dinoflagellates), a group of parasites (apicomplexans), and a distinctive group of eukaryotes that move by means of cilia (the ciliates). Alveolates have small membrane-bounded cavities (alveoli) under their cell surfaces. The function of the alveoli is unknown; they may help stabilize the cell surface and regulate the cell's water and ion content.

Dinoflagellata (Dinoflagellates)

Dinoflagellates are abundant components of the vast aquatic pastures of phytoplankton that are suspended near the water surface and provide the foundation of most marine and many freshwater food webs. There are also heterotrophic species of dinoflagellates.

Of the several thousand known dinoflagellate species, most are unicellular, but some are colonial forms. Each dinoflagellate species has a characteristic shape reinforced in some species by internal plates of cellulose (FIGURE 28.12). The action of two flagella in perpendicular grooves in this "armor" produces a spinning movement for which these organisms are named (from the Greek dinos, whirling).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 28-12. A dinoflagellate. Flagellar action spins this toplike form (SEM).

Dinoflagellate blooms--episodes of explosive population growth--cause red tides in coastal waters. These blooms are brownish red or pinkish orange because of the predominant pigments (xanthophylls) in the plastids of dinoflagellates. Toxins produced by some red-tide organisms have resulted in massive invertebrate and fish kills and can be deadly to humans as well.

One especially dangerous dinoflagellate called Pfiesteria piscicida is actually carnivorous. During blooms, its toxin stuns fish, and the dinoflagellates feed on their prey's body fluids. In the past decade, the frequency of Pfiesteria blooms and fish kills have increased in coastal waters of the U.S. mid-Atlantic states, possibly a result of pollution of the water with fertilizers (nitrates and phosphates).

Some dinoflagellates are spectacularly bioluminescent. An ATP-driven chemical reaction gives off light, creating an eerie ocean glow at night when waves, boats, or human swimmers agitate water containing dense populations of the dinoflagellates. A possible function of the bioluminescence: When the surrounding water is agitated by small predators that feed on phytoplankton, the light emitted by the dinoflagellates attracts fish that eat those smaller predators. How would you test this hypothesis?

Some dinoflagellates live as mutualistic symbionts of animals called cnidarians that build coral reefs; the photosynthetic output of these dinoflagellates is the main food source for reef communities.

Apicomplexa (Apicomplexans)

All apicomplexans are parasites of animals. Some cause serious human diseases. The parasites disseminate as tiny infectious cells called sporozoites. As seen with the electron microscope, one end (the apex) of the sporozoite cell contains a complex of organelles specialized for penetrating host cells and tissues; thus the name Apicomplexa. Most apicomplexans have intricate life cycles with both sexual and asexual stages, and these cycles often require two or more different host species for completion. An example is Plasmodium, the parasite that causes malaria (FIGURE 28.13). The incidence of malaria was greatly diminished in the 1960s by the use of insecticides that reduced populations of Anopheles mosquitoes, which spread the disease, and by drugs that killed the parasites in humans. However, the multiplication of resistant varieties of both the mosquitoes and the Plasmodium species have caused a resurgence of the disease. About 300 million people are now infected in the tropics, and up to 2 million die each year from the disease.

Considerable research on possible malarial vaccines has been carried out, but with little success. Plasmodium is an extremely evasive parasite. It spends most of its time inside human liver and blood cells, hiding from the host's immune system. The problem is compounded by changes in the surface proteins of Plasmodium; the parasite continually changes the "face" that it shows to the infected person's immune system. Recent identification of a gene that seems to confer resistance to chloroquine, an important antimalarial drug, may lead to ways of blocking drug resistance in Plasmodium. Another recent discovery has exciting evolutionary and medical implications. A team of molecular biologists led by Sabine Kohler, at the University of Pennsylvania, found that Plasmodium and several other apicomplexans contain a plastid, now nonphotosynthetic, that an apicomplexan ancestor probably acquired from a green alga by secondary endosymbiosis. Once researchers discover the critical functions the plastids perform for their host cells, it may be possible to develop new antimalarial drugs that target those functions.

Ciliophora (Ciliates)

This diverse group of protists is named for their use of cilia to move and feed (FIGURE 28.14). Most ciliates live as solitary cells in fresh water. In contrast to most flagella, cilia are relatively short. They are associated with a submembrane system of microtubules that may coordinate the movement of the thousands of cilia.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 28-14. Ciliates (all LMs).

Some ciliates are completely covered by rows of cilia, whereas others have their cilia clustered into fewer rows or tufts. The specific arrangements adapt the ciliates for their diverse lifestyles. Some species, for instance, scurry about on leglike structures constructed from many cilia bonded together. Other forms, such as Stentor, have rows of tightly packed cilia that function collectively as locomotor membranelles. Ciliates are among the most complex of all cells.

A unique feature of ciliate genetics is the presence of two types of nuclei, a large macronucleus and usually several tiny micronuclei. The macronucleus has 50 or more copies of the genome. The genes are not distributed in typical chromosomes but are instead packaged into a much larger number of small units, each with hundreds of copies of just a few genes. The macronucleus controls the everyday functions of the cell by synthesizing RNA and is also necessary for asexual reproduction. Ciliates generally reproduce by binary fission, during which the macronucleus elongates and splits, rather than undergoing mitotic division. Some species of Paramecium have from 1 to as many as 80 micronuclei, which do not function in growth, maintenance, and asexual reproduction of the cell but are required for sexual processes that generate genetic variation. The sexual shuffling of genes occurs during the process known as conjugation (FIGURE 28.15). Notice in the diagram that in ciliates, sexual mechanisms of meiosis and syngamy are processes separate from reproduction.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 28-15. Conjugation and genetic recombination in Paramecium caudatum.




