
 Some fungi are pathogens

Of the 100,000 known species of fungi, about 30%  make their living as parasites, mostly on or in plants. For example, Ophiostoma ulmi, the ascomycete that causes Dutch elm disease, has drastically changed the landscape of the northeastern United States (FIGURE 31.20a). Accidentally introduced to the United States on logs that were sent from Europe to help pay World War I debts, the fungus is carried from tree to tree by bark beetles. Another ascomycete, Cryphonectria parasitica, has almost eliminated the native American chestnut. Fungi are also serious agricultural pests. Some species infect grain crops and cause tremendous economic losses each year. For example, the basidiomycete Puccinia graminis causes wheat rust (FIGURE 31.20b).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 31-20. Examples of fungal diseases of plants.

Some of the fungi that attack food crops are toxic to humans. For example, some species of the mold Aspergillus contaminate improperly stored grain and peanuts by secreting compounds called aflatoxins, which are carcinogenic. In another example, one type of ascomycete, Clavicepspurpurea, forms purple structures called ergots on rye (FIGURE 31.20c). If diseased rye is inadvertently milled into flour and consumed, poisons from the ergots cause gangrene, nervous spasms, burning sensations, hallucinations, and temporary insanity. One epidemic in about 944 A.D. killed more than 40,000 people in France. One of the hallucinogens that has been isolated from ergots is lysergic acid, the raw material from which LSD is made. On the other hand, toxins extracted from fungi often have medicinal uses when administered in weak doses. For example, an ergot compound is helpful in treating high blood pressure and stopping maternal bleeding after childbirth.

Animals are much less susceptible to parasitic fungi than are plants. Only about 50 species of fungi are known to be parasitic in humans and other animals. Their damage to hosts, however, is disproportionately large compared to their taxonomic diversity. In humans, fungi cause infections ranging from annoyances such as athlete's foot to deadly lung diseases.

The general term for a fungal infection is mycosis. Skin mycoses include the disease ringworm, so named because it appears as circular red areas on the skin. The ascomycetes that cause ringworm can infect almost any skin surface. Most commonly, they grow on the feet, causing the intense itching and blisters known as athlete's foot. Though highly contagious, athlete's foot and other ringworm infections can be treated with various fungicidal lotions and powders. Systemic mycoses, usually very serious, are fungal infections that spread throughout the body, usually from spores that are inhaled. Two examples are histoplasmosis and coccidioidomycosis, which are both very serious diseases with tuberculosis-like symptoms. The yeast Candida albicans is an example of an opportunistic pathogen. That means it is a normal inhabitant of the human body that only causes problems such as vaginal yeast infections when some other change in the body's microbiology, chemistry, or immunology allows the yeast to grow unchecked. Opportunistic infections, including mycoses, have increased in the past few decades, partly because of AIDS, which compromises the immune system.




