
 Vegetative propagation of plants is common in agriculture

With the objective of improving crops, orchards, and ornamental plants, various methods have been devised for propagating plants asexually. Most are based on the ability of plants to form adventitious roots or shoots.

Clones from Cuttings

Most houseplants, woody ornamentals, and orchard trees are asexually reproduced from plant fragments called cuttings. In some cases, shoot or stem cuttings are used. At the cut end of the shoot a mass of dividing, undifferentiated cells called a callus forms, and then adventitious roots develop from the callus. If the shoot fragment includes a node, then adventitious roots form without a callus stage. Some plants, including African violets, can be propagated from single leaves rather than stems. For still other plants, cuttings are taken from specialized storage stems. For example, a potato can be cut up into several pieces, each with a vegetative bud, or "eye," that regenerates a whole plant.

In a modification of vegetative reproduction from cuttings, a twig or bud from one plant can be grafted onto a plant of a closely related species or a different variety of the same species. Grafting makes it possible to combine the best qualities of different species or varieties into a single plant. The graft is usually done when the plant is young. The plant that provides the root system is called the stock; the twig grafted onto the stock is referred to as the scion. For example, scions from French varieties of vines that produce superior wine grapes are grafted onto root stock of American varieties, which are more resistant to certain soil pathogens. The quality of the fruit, determined by the genes of the scion, is not diminished by the genetic makeup of the stock. In some cases of grafting, however, the stock can alter the characteristics of the shoot system that develops from the scion. For example, dwarf fruit trees are made by grafting normal twigs onto dwarf stock varieties that retard the vegetative growth of the shoot system. Because seeds are produced by the part of the plant derived from the scion, they would give rise to plants of the scion species if planted.

Test-Tube Cloning and Related Techniques

Plant biotechnologists have adopted in vitro methods to create and clone novel plant varieties. It is possible to grow whole plants by culturing small explants (pieces of tissue cut from the parent), or even single parenchyma cells, on an artificial medium containing nutrients and hormones (FIGURE 38.16). The cultured cells divide and form an undifferentiated callus. When the hormonal balance is manipulated in the culture medium, the callus can sprout shoots and roots with fully differentiated cells. The test-tube plantlets can then be transferred to soil, where they continue their growth. A single plant can be cloned into thousands of copies by subdividing calluses as they grow. This method is used for propagating orchids and also for cloning pine trees that deposit wood at unusually fast rates (see FIGURE 30.8f).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 38-16. Test-tube cloning of carrots. (a) Just a few parenchyma cells from a carrot gave rise to this callus, a mass of undifferentiated cells. (b) The callus differentiates into an entire plant, with leaves, stems, and roots. (See FIGURE 21.5)

Plant tissue culture also facilitates genetic engineering in plants. Most techniques for the introduction of foreign genes into plants require the use of small pieces of plant tissue or single plant cells as the starting material. Test-tube culture makes it possible to regenerate genetically modified (transgenic) plants from a single plant cell into which the foreign DNA has been incorporated. For example, researchers have used recombinant DNA technology to transfer a gene for bean protein into cultured cells from a sunflower plant. The experiment improved the protein quality of sunflower seeds harvested from the transgenic plants. Firing DNA-coated pellets from a gun is one method researchers use to insert foreign DNA into plant cells (FIGURE 38.17). The techniques of genetic engineering are discussed in more detail in Chapter 20.

Some researchers are coupling a technique known as protoplast fusion with tissue culture methods to actually invent new plant varieties that can be cloned. Protoplasts are plant cells that have had their cell walls enzymatically removed by treatment with cell-wall-degrading enzymes (cellulases and pectinases) isolated from fungi (FIGURE 38.18). Before they are cultured, the protoplasts can be screened for mutations that may improve the agricultural value of the plant. It is also possible in some cases to fuse two protoplasts from different plant species that would otherwise be reproductively incompatible, and then culture the hybrid protoplasts. Each of the many protoplasts can regenerate a wall and eventually form a hybrid plantlet. One success of this method has been a hybrid between a potato and a wild relative called black nightshade. The nightshade is resistant to an herbicide that is commonly used to kill weeds. The hybrids are also resistant, and this makes it possible to "weed" a potato field with the herbicide without killing the potato plants.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 38-18. Protoplasts. These wall-less plant cells are prepared by treating plant cells or tissues with purified wall-degrading enzymes isolated from certain types of fungi. Researchers can fuse protoplasts from different species to make hybrids and can also culture the hybrid cells to produce a new plant.

The in vitro culturing of plant cells and tissues is fundamental to most types of plant biotechnology. The other basic process behind modern plant biotechnology is the ability to produce transgenic plants through various methods of genetic engineering. In this chapter's last section, we take a closer look at plant biotechnology.




