
 The four major threats to biodiversity are habitat destruction, introduced species, overexploitation, and food chain disruptions

Habitat Destruction

Human alteration of habitat is the single greatest threat to biodiversity throughout the biosphere. Massive destruction of habitats throughout the world has been brought about by agriculture, urban development, forestry, mining, and environmental pollution. The IUCN (see p. 1225) implicates destruction of physical habitat in 73%  of the species designated extinct, endangered, vulnerable, or rare.

Though most studies have focused on terrestrial ecosystems, habitat loss also appears to be a major threat to marine biodiversity, especially on continental coasts and coral reefs. About 93%  of Earth's coral reefs, among the most species-rich aquatic communities, have been damaged by human activities. At the current rate of destruction, 40-50%  of the reefs could be lost in the next 30 to 40 years. About a third of the planet's marine fish species utilize coral reefs, which occupy only about 0.2%  of the ocean floor.

In addition to habitat destruction over large regions, many natural landscapes have been fragmented, broken up into small patches (FIGURE 55.5). FIGURE 55.6 illustrates how forest areas in southern Wisconsin were fragmented over a 119-year period. Forest fragmentation is also occurring at a rapid rate in tropical forests. For example, tropical rain forest losses around Veracruz, Mexico, exceeded 85%  during the 20-year span from 1967 to 1987. Deforestation continued to proceed up from the lowlands, and by 2000, only 8%  of the original forest remained, in the form of an archipelago of small forest islands. Deforestation in this area is due mostly to clearing for cattle ranches. The human population of this region has more than doubled in the last 25 years.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 55-5. Fragmentation of a forest ecosystem. In this aerial photograph of Mt. Hood National Forest in the western United States, you can see the "islands" of coniferous forest that were created when much of the original forest was cut for timber.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 55-6. The history of habitat reduction and fragmentation in a Wisconsin forest. Between 1831 and 1950, more than 95%  of the original forest (green) in Cadiz Township was lost, and the remaining 5%  consisted of small fragments.

In almost all cases, habitat fragmentation leads to species loss. The prairies of North America are a good example. Prairie covered about 800,000 ha of southern Wisconsin when Europeans first arrived, but now occupies less than 0.1%  of its original area. Plant diversity surveys of 54 Wisconsin prairie remnants were conducted in 1948-1954 and then repeated in 1987-1988. During the few decades between surveys, the prairie fragments lost between 8%  and 60%  of their plant species, depending on the fragment.

Introduced Species

Ranking second behind habitat loss as a cause of the biodiversity crisis, introduced species have probably contributed to about 40%  of the extinctions recorded since 1750. Sometimes called exotic species, introduced species are those that humans move from the species' native locations to new geographic regions. (We discussed zebra mussels and Africanized bees in the United States in FIGURES 50.7 and 50.8.) In some cases, the introductions are intentional. For example, European red foxes were intentionally introduced to Australia in the late 1800s because of an interest in fox hunting. By preying on medium-sized native mammals, foxes have contributed to several of these mammals' becoming extinct. Another example, mentioned earlier, was the disastrous 1960s introduction of the Nile perch to Lake Victoria (FIGURE 55.7a, p. 1230). In other cases, humans transplant species accidentally. For instance, the brown tree snake was accidentally introduced to Guam as a "stowaway" in military cargo after World War II (FIGURE 55.7b). Since then, 12 species of birds and 6 lizard species on which the snakes prey have become extinct on Guam. All 18 of these species continue to live on Guam's small offshore islands, which the snake has not colonized. Intentional or not, introduced species that gain a foothold usually disrupt their adopted community, often by preying on native organisms or outcompeting native species for resources.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 55-7. A small sample of disastrous species introductions. (a) One of the largest freshwater fishes (up to 2 m long and weighing up to 450 kg), the Nile perch was introduced to Lake Victoria in East Africa to provide high-protein food for the growing human population. Unfortunately, the perch's main effect has been to wipe out about 200 smaller native species, reducing its own food supply to a critical level. (b) The brown tree snake, accidentally introduced to Guam at the end of World War II, has probably eliminated 18 species of birds and lizards in its new home. (c) Kudzu has invaded much of the U.S. South. (d) European starlings have displaced many native songbirds in North America. (e) Argentine ants are seen here ganging up on a red ant native to California. (f) In this underwater photo of a California lagoon, you can see an aquarium-bred, hyper-vigorous variety of the seaweed Caulerpa (in foreground) crowding out the native eelgrass.

Humans have also introduced many species with the best of intentions. For example, the U.S. Department of Agriculture encouraged the import of a Japanese plant called kudzu to the American South in the 1930s to help control erosion, especially along irrigation canals. At first, the government paid farmers to plant kudzu vines. The enthusiasm for the new vines led to kudzu festivals in southern towns, complete with the crowning of kudzu queens. But kudzu celebrations ended decades ago as the invasive plant took over vast expanses of the southern landscape (FIGURE 55.7c). Another introduced plant called purple loosestrife is claiming over 200,000 acres of wetlands per year, crowding out native plants and the animals that feed on the native flora. The story is similar for the introduction to the United States of a bird called the European starling (FIGURE 55.7d). A citizens group intent on introducing all plants and animals mentioned in Shakespeare's plays imported 120 starlings to New York's Central Park in 1890 (the starling is mentioned in just one line of Shakespeare's Henry IV). From that foothold, starlings spread rapidly across North America. In less than a century, the population increased to about 100 million, displacing many of the native songbird species in the United States and Canada.

The ease of travel by ships and airplanes has accelerated the transplant of species, especially unintentional introductions. For example, fire ants, which can inflict very painful beelike stings, reached the southeastern United States in the early 1900s from South America, probably in the hold of a produce ship. Fire ants have been extending their range northward and westward ever since. In Texas, for example, fire ants have apparently managed to eliminate about two-thirds of the native ant species. And another accidentally introduced ant species, the Argentine ant, is decimating populations of native ants in California (FIGURE 55.7e).

An even more recent example of introduced species is the appearance in 2000 of an alga called Caulerpa in a California lagoon (FIGURE 55.7f). The small seaweed was probably introduced by someone dumping a home saltwater aquarium. Native to Caribbean waters, the California invader is a variety of the alga that has been domesticated and selectively bred as an aquarium alga for its vigor and resistance to disease and herbivores. An earlier invasion of the Mediterranean Sea by this super seaweed is displacing many of the native algae there, and the same thing could happen now all along the Pacific coast of North America.

Introduced species are, of course, an international problem. But in the United States alone, there are at least 50,000 introduced species, with a cost to the economy of over $130 billion in damage and control efforts. And that does not include the priceless loss of native species.

Overexploitation

Overexploitation refers generally to the human harvesting of wild plants or animals at rates exceeding the ability of populations of those species to rebound. It is possible for overexploitation to endanger certain plant species, such as rare trees that produce valuable wood or some other commercial product. But overexploitation more often refers to the overhunting and overfishing of animals. Especially susceptible to overexploitation are large species with low intrinsic reproductive rates, such as elephants, whales, rhinoceroses, and other animals considered valuable by humans. Species on small islands are particularly vulnerable to extinction due to overexploitation. For example, by the 1840s, humans had overhunted the great auk, a large, flightless seabird, to extinction on islands in the Atlantic Ocean because of a demand for feathers, eggs, and meat (FIGURE 55.8).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 55-8. The great auk (Pinguinis impennis). Endemic to islands in the North Atlantic Ocean, the great auk was hunted to extinction by 1844.

The decline of the African elephant, the largest extant terrestrial animal, is a classic example of the impact of overhunting. African elephants take 10 to 11 years to reach sexual maturity, and then a fertile female has a single calf every 3 to 9 years. The potential rate of population increase is only about 6%  per year, a low growth rate. Elephant populations have been declining in most of Africa during the last 50 years. Only in South Africa have elephant populations been stable or increasing. Illegal hunting for ivory is the major cause of this collapse of elephant populations. When the price of ivory increased during the 1970s, the amount of poaching for ivory grew dramatically. Currently, there is a ban on ivory trade, but this is having little impact in central and eastern Africa, where poaching is rampant.

Overfishing has dramatically reduced the population sizes of many commercially important fish species. Just over a century ago, British biologist T. H. Huxley declared, "Probably all the great sea fisheries are inexhaustible: that is to say that nothing we do seriously affects the number of fish." Huxley and his contemporaries grossly underestimated an increasing demand for protein by an exploding human population coupled with overexploitation made possible by new harvesting technologies, such as long-line fishing and modern trawlers. Many populations of fishes that humans consume have now been reduced to levels that cannot sustain further exploitation. The fate of the North Atlantic bluefin tuna is just one example. Until the past few decades, this big tuna was considered a sport fish of little commercial value--just a few cents per pound for cat food. Then, beginning in the 1980s, wholesalers began airfreighting fresh, iced bluefin to Japan for sushi and sashimi. In that market, the fish now brings up to $100 per pound (FIGURE 55.9). With that kind of demand, the results are predictable. It took just ten years to reduce the North American bluefin population to less than 20%  of its 1980 size. The collapse of the northern cod fishery off Newfoundland in the 1990s is a recent example of how it is even possible to overharvest what had been a very common species.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 55-9. North Atlantic bluefin tuna auctioned in a Japanese fish market. In spite of quotas, the high price that bluefin tuna brings may doom the species to extinction.

Disruption of Food Chains

Like falling dominoes, the extinction of one species can doom its predators. But this is likely only if the predator feeds exclusively on one species, which is a rare trophic arrangement. Certainly, host-specific parasites can become extinct if their host becomes extinct. But such extinctions have not been the subject of much research.

Most of the evidence for secondary extinctions of larger organisms due to loss of prey is circumstantial. For example, the forest eagle of New Zealand, which preyed on large ground birds, became extinct around 1400 following the extinction of flightless birds called moas. After humans reached New Zealand around A.D. 1000, they probably hunted all 11 species of the large, tame moas to extinction. Although it is a reasonable hypothesis that the disappearance of the forest eagle was related to the loss of its main prey, we cannot be sure of a cause-and-effect relationship. Similarly, the decline of the black-footed ferret on the Great Plains of North America paralleled the decline of its main prey, prairie dogs. But other factors may have contributed to the decrease in ferret populations. Because most predators are not so specialized in the prey they'll eat, food chain disruption is probably less important as a cause of extinction than habitat destruction, introduced species, and overexploitation.

Now that we have an overview of the biodiversity crisis and its causes, let's examine how conservation biologists hope to apply basic principles of evolutionary biology and ecology to slow the loss of biodiversity at its various levels.




