
 The human population has been growing almost exponentially for three centuries but cannot do so indefinitely

The exponential growth model in FIGURE 52.8 essentially describes the population explosion of humans since 1650. Ours is a singular case; it is unlikely that any other population of large animals has ever sustained so much growth for so long. The human population increased relatively slowly until about 1650, when approximately 500 million people inhabited Earth (FIGURE 52.20). The population doubled to 1 billion within the next two centuries, doubled again to 2 billion between 1850 and 1930, and doubled still again by 1975 to more than 4 billion. The population now numbers over 6 billion people and increases by about 80 million each year. The world's population increases by 214,000 people per day, equivalent to adding a city the size of Amarillo, Texas, or Madison, Wisconsin, every day. Every week the population increases by the size of San Antonio, Milwaukee, or Indianapolis. It takes only three years for world population growth to add the population equivalent of another United States. If the present growth rate persists, there will be 7.8 billion people on Earth by the year 2025. How might this population increase stop?



Click image to enlarge



Fig 52-20. Human population growth. The human population has grown almost continuously throughout history, but it has skyrocketed since the Industrial Revolution. No other population of large organisms has shown such growth for so long, and the human population must eventually either level off or decline. Whether this reduction in population growth will occur because of decreased birth rates or massive mortality is an open question, one that careful population policies can address.

The Demographic Transition

A regional human population can exist in one of two configurations to maintain population stability: 

or 

The movement from the first toward the second state is called the demographic transition. FIGURE 52.21 illustrates the demographic transition for Sweden and Mexico. In Sweden, the demographic transition took about 150 years, but in Mexico, these changes have been quicker.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 52-21. Demographic transition in Sweden and Mexico, 1750-1997. When births exceed deaths, the population grows (shaded zones). The transition from high birth and high death rates to low birth and low death rates took 150 years in Sweden but has been compressed in Mexico to half that time.

After 1950, mortality rates declined rapidly in most developing countries, but birth rates have declined in a more variable manner. Birth rate decline has been most dramatic in China. In 1970, the birth rate in China predicted an average family size of 5.9 children; by 1999, the expected family size was 1.85 children. In India, birth rates have fallen more slowly and irregularly. In much of Africa, the transition to lower birth rates is just beginning.

How do such variable birth rates affect the growth of the world's population? Clearly, population dynamics are regional. In the developed nations, populations are near equilibrium (growth rate about 0.1%  per year), with reproductive rates near the replacement level (total fertility rate = 2.1 children per female). In many developed countries, including Canada and the United Kingdom, total fertility rates are in fact below replacement. These populations will eventually decline if there is no immigration and if the birth rate does not change. About 80%  of the world's people now live in the less developed countries, and most of the current population growth (1.7%  per year) is occurring in these nations.

A unique feature of human population growth is our ability to control it with voluntary contraception and family planning. Reduced family size is the key to the demographic transition. However, there is a great deal of disagreement among world leaders as to how much support should be provided for global family planning efforts. Social change and the rising educational and career aspirations of women in many cultures encourage them to delay marriage and postpone reproduction. Delayed reproduction helps to decrease population growth rates and allows us to plan for zero population growth under conditions of low birth rates and low death rates.

Age Structure

One important demographic factor in present and future growth trends is a country's age structure, the relative number of individuals of each age (FIGURE 52.22, p. 1170). The relatively uniform age distribution in Italy, for instance, contributes to that country's stable population size; individuals of reproductive age or younger are not disproportionately represented in the population. In contrast, Kenya has an age structure that is bottom-heavy, skewed toward young individuals who will grow up and sustain the explosive growth with their own reproduction. Notice in FIGURE 52.22 that the age structure for the United States is relatively even except for a bulge that corresponds to the "baby boom" that lasted for about two decades after the end of World War II. Even though couples born during those years have had an average of fewer than two children, the nation's overall birth rate still exceeds the death rate because there are still so many "boomers" and their offspring of reproductive age.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 52-22. Age-structure pyramids for the human population of Kenya (growing at 2.1%  per year), the United States (growing at 0.6%  per year), and Italy (zero growth) for 1995.

Age-structure diagrams not only reveal a population's growth trends, but can also point to future social conditions. Based on the diagrams in FIGURE 52.22, we can predict, for instance, that employment for an increasing number of working-age people will continue to be a significant problem for Kenya in the foreseeable future. In Italy and the United States, a decreasing proportion of working-age people--mostly those of college age today--will soon be supporting an increasing population of retired "boomers." In the United States, it is this demographic feature that has made the future of Social Security and Medicare such a major political issue. Understanding age structures can help us plan for the future.




