
 Plant hormones help coordinate growth, development, and responses to environmental stimuli

TABLE 39.1 previews some of the major classes of plant hormones: auxin, cytokinins, gibberellins, abscisic acid, ethylene, and brassinosteroids. Many of the molecules that function in defense of the plant against pathogens are probably plant hormones as well. (These molecules will be discussed later in the chapter.) Notice that all of the hormones shown in TABLE 39.1 are relatively small molecules. Their transport from cell to cell often involves passage across cell walls, a pathway that blocks the movement of large molecules.

Table 39-1. An Overview of Plant Hormones

HormoneWhere Produced or Found in PlantMajor FunctionsAuxin (IAA)
			  
		Embryo of seed, meristems of apical buds, young leavesStimulates stem elongation (low concentration only) root growth, cell differentiation, and branching; regulates development of fruit; enhances apical dominance; functions in phototropism and gravitropism.Cytokinins (such as zeatin)
			  
		Synthesized in roots and transported to other organsAffect root growth and differentiation; stimulate cell division and growth; stimulate germination; delay senescence.Gibberellins (such as GA3)
			  
		Meristems of apical buds and roots, young levels, embryoPromote seed and bud germination, stem elongation, and leaf growth; stimulate flowering and development of fruit; affect root growth and differentiationAbscisic acid
			  
		Leaves, stems, roots, green fruitInhibits growth; closes stomata during water stress; counteracts breaking of dormancyEthylene
			  
		Tissues of ripening fruits, nodes of stems, aging leves and flowersPromotes fruit ripening, opposes some auxin effects; promotes or inhibits growth and development of roots, leaves, and flowers, depending on speciesBrassinosteroids (such as brassinolide)
			  
		Seeds, fruits, shoots, leaves, and floral budsInhibits root growth; retards leaf abscission; promotes xylem differentiationIn general, hormones control plant growth and development by affecting the division, elongation, and differentiation of cells. Some hormones also mediate shorter-term physiological responses of plants to environmental stimuli. Each hormone has multiple effects, depending on its site of action, its concentration, and the developmental stage of the plant.

Plant hormones are produced in very low concentrations, but a minute amount of hormone can have a profound effect on the growth and development of a plant organ. This implies that the hormonal signal must be amplified in some way. A hormone may act by altering the expression of genes, by affecting the activity of existing enzymes, or by changing properties of membranes. Any of these actions could redirect the metabolism and development of a cell responding to a small number of hormone molecules. Signal transduction pathways amplify the hormonal signal and connect it to a cell's specific responses.

Response to a hormone usually depends not so much on the absolute amount of that hormone as on its relative concentration compared with other hormones. It is hormonal balance, rather than hormones acting in isolation, that may control the growth and development of the plant. These interactions will become apparent in the following survey of hormone function.

Auxin

The term auxin is used for any chemical substance that promotes the elongation of coleoptiles, although auxins actually have multiple functions in both monocots and dicots. The natural auxin occurring in plants is indoleacetic acid, or IAA, but several other compounds, including some synthetic ones, have auxin activity. Throughout this chapter, however, the name auxin is used specifically to refer to IAA. Although auxin was the first plant hormone to be discovered, much remains to be learned about auxin signal transduction and the regulation of auxin biosynthesis. Current evidence suggests that auxin is produced from the amino acid tryptophan in the shoot tips of plants.

The speed at which auxin is transported down the stem from the shoot apex is about 10 mm per hour--much too fast for diffusion, although slower than translocation in phloem. Auxin seems to be transported directly through parenchyma tissue, from one cell to the next. It moves only from shoot tip to base, not in the reverse direction. This unidirectional transport of auxin is called polar transport. Polar transport has nothing to do with gravity, for auxin travels upward in experiments where a stem or coleoptile segment is placed upside down. Polar auxin transport requires energy. FIGURE 39.6 illustrates how proton pumps in the plasma membrane, driven by ATP, couple metabolic energy to auxin transport. The mechanism of polar auxin transport is another example of cellular work driven by chemiosmosis, the harnessing of H+ gradients generated by proton pumps (see Chapter 9).

Although auxin affects several aspects of plant development, one of its chief functions is to stimulate the elongation of cells in young developing shoots.

The Role of Auxin in Cell Elongation.The apical meristem of a shoot is a major site of auxin synthesis. As auxin from the shoot apex moves down to the region of cell elongation (see Chapter 35), the hormone stimulates growth of the cells, probably by binding to a receptor built into the plasma membrane. Auxin stimulates growth only over a certain concentration range, from about 10-8 to 10-4M. At higher concentrations, auxin may inhibit cell elongation, probably by inducing the production of ethylene, a hormone that generally acts as an inhibitor of elongation. We will return to this hormonal interaction in the discussion of ethylene.

According to a proposal called the acid growth hypothesis, proton pumps play a major role in the growth response of cells to auxin. In a shoot's region of elongation, auxin stimulates plasma membrane proton pumps, an action that, within minutes, both increases the voltage across the membrane (membrane potential) and lowers the pH in the cell wall (FIGURE 39.7). The acidification of the wall activates enzymes called expansins that break the cross-links (hydrogen bonds) between cellulose microfibrils, loosening the fabric of the wall. (Expansins can even weaken the integrity of filter paper made of pure cellulose.) Increasing the membrane potential enhances ion uptake into the cell, which causes the osmotic uptake of water. The uptake of water, along with the increased plasticity of the walls, enables the cell to elongate.

Auxin also alters gene expression rapidly, causing cells in the region of elongation to produce new proteins within minutes. Some of these proteins are short-lived transcription factors that repress or activate the expression of other genes. For sustained growth after this initial spurt, cells must make more cytoplasm and wall material. Auxin also stimulates this sustained growth response.

Lateral and Adventitious Root Formation.Auxins are used commercially in the vegetative propagation of plants by cuttings. Treating a detached leaf or stem with rooting powder containing auxin often causes adventitious roots to form near the cut surface. Auxin is also involved in the branching of roots. Researchers found that an Arabidopsis mutant that exhibits extreme proliferation of lateral roots has an auxin concentration 17-fold higher than normal.

Auxins as Herbicides.Synthetic auxins, such as 2,4-dinitrophenol (2,4-D), are widely used as herbicides. Monocots, such as maize and turfgrass, can rapidly inactivate these synthetic auxins, but dicots cannot, and die from a hormonal overdose. Spraying cereal fields or turf with 2,4-D eliminates dicot (broadleaf) weeds such as dandelions.

Other Effects of Auxin.In addition to stimulating cell elongation for primary growth, auxin affects secondary growth by inducing cell division in the vascular cambium and by influencing the differentiation of secondary xylem (see Chapter 35). Developing seeds synthesize auxin, which promotes the growth of fruits in plants. Synthetic auxins sprayed on tomato vines induce fruit development without a need for pollination. This makes it possible to grow seedless tomatoes by substituting synthetic auxin for the auxin normally synthesized by the developing seeds.

Cytokinins

Trial-and-error attempts to find chemical additives that would enhance the growth and development of plant cells in tissue culture led to the discovery of cytokinins. In the 1940s, Johannes van Overbeek, working at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New York, found he could stimulate the growth of plant embryos by adding coconut milk, the liquid endosperm of a coconut's giant seed, to his culture medium. A decade later, Folke Skoog and Carlos O. Miller, at the University of Wisconsin, induced cultured tobacco cells to divide by adding degraded samples of DNA. The active ingredients of both experimental additives turned out to be modified forms of adenine, one of the components of nucleic acids. These growth regulators were named cytokinins because they stimulate cytokinesis, or cell division. Of the variety of cytokinins that occur naturally in plants, the most common is zeatin, so named because it was first discovered in maize (Zea mays).

Despite much effort, the enzyme that produces cytokinins has neither been purified from plants nor has the gene that encodes for it been identified. Mark Holland of Salisbury State University has proposed that plants may not even produce their own cytokinins: His hypothesis is that cytokinins are actually produced by prokaryotes called methylobacteria that live symbiotically inside actively growing plant tissues, even in in vitro cultures. Indeed, normal developmental processes are impaired when methylobacteria are eliminated, and these processes can be restored either by the reapplication of methylobacteria or the addition of cytokinins. Regardless of whether this provocative hypothesis gains support, the issue underscores the importance of genomic sequencing. Now that the sequencing of Arabidopsis is complete, the gene for a cytokinin-producing enzyme, if present, should be more easily identified.

Regardless of the source of cytokinins, plant cells do have cytokinin receptors. Some evidence points to the existence of two entirely different classes of cytokinin receptors, one intracellular and the other on the cell surface. The cytoplasmic receptor binds cytokinins directly and can stimulate transcription in isolated nuclei. In some plant cells, cytokinins open Ca2+ channels in the plasma membrane, causing an increase in cytosolic Ca2+. Although much remains to be learned about cytokinin synthesis and signal transduction, some of the major effects that cytokinins have on the physiology and development of plants are well documented.

Control of Cell Division and Differentiation.Cytokinins are produced in actively growing tissues, particularly in roots, embryos, and fruits. Cytokinins produced in the root reach their target tissues by moving up the plant in the xylem sap. Acting in concert with auxin, cytokinins stimulate cell division and influence the pathway of differentiation. The effects of cytokinins on cells growing in tissue culture provide clues about how this class of hormones may function in an intact plant. When a piece of parenchyma tissue from a stem is cultured in the absence of cytokinins, the cells grow very large but do not divide. Cytokinins alone have no effect. If, however, cytokinins are added along with auxin, the cells divide. The ratio of cytokinin to auxin controls the differentiation of the cells. When the concentrations of the two hormones are balanced, the mass of cells continues to grow, but it remains a cluster of undifferentiated cells called a callus. If cytokinin levels are raised, shoot buds develop from the callus. If auxin levels are raised, roots form.

Control of Apical Dominance.Cytokinins, auxin, and other factors interact in the control of apical dominance, the ability of the terminal bud to suppress the development of axillary buds. Until recently, the leading hypothesis to explain the hormonal regulation of apical dominance--the direct inhibition hypothesis--proposed that auxin and cytokinin act antagonistically in regulating axillary bud growth. According to this view, auxin transported down the shoot from the terminal bud directly inhibited axillary buds from growing, causing a shoot to lengthen at the expense of lateral branching. Meanwhile, cytokinins entering the shoot system from roots counter the action of auxin by signaling axillary buds to begin growing. Thus, the ratio of auxin and cytokinin was viewed as the critical factor in controlling axillary bud inhibition. Many observations are consistent with the direct inhibition hypothesis. If the terminal bud, the primary source of auxin, is removed, the inhibition of axillary buds is removed and the plant becomes bushier (FIGURE 39.8). Application of auxin to the cut surface of the decapitated seedling resuppresses the growth of the lateral buds. Mutants that overproduce cytokinins or plants treated with cytokinins also tend to be bushier than normal. One prediction of the direct inhibition hypothesis not borne out by experiment is that decapitation, by removing the primary source of auxin, should lead to a decrease in the auxin levels of axillary buds. Biochemical studies, however, have revealed the opposite: auxin levels actually increase in the axillary buds of decapitated plants. The direct inhibition hypothesis, therefore, does not account for all experimental findings: It is likely that plant biologists have not uncovered all the pieces of this puzzle.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 39-8. Apical dominance. (a) Auxin from the apical bud inhibits the growth of axillary buds. This favors elongation of the shoot's main axis. Cytokinins, which are transported upward from roots, counter auxin, stimulating the growth of axillary buds. This explains why, in many plants, axillary buds near the shoot tip are less likely to grow than those closer to the roots. (b) Removal of the apical bud from the same plant enabled lateral branches to grow.

Anti-Aging Effects.Cytokinins retard the aging of some plant organs by inhibiting protein breakdown, by stimulating RNA and protein synthesis, and by mobilizing nutrients from surrounding tissues. If leaves removed from a plant are dipped in a cytokinin solution, they stay green much longer than otherwise. Cytokinins also slow the deterioration of leaves on intact plants. Because of this anti-aging effect, florists use cytokinin sprays to keep cut flowers fresh.

Gibberellins

A century ago, farmers in Asia noticed that some rice seedlings in their paddies grew so tall and spindly that they toppled over before they could mature and flower. In 1926, the Japanese plant pathologist E. Kurosawa discovered that a fungus of the genus Gibberella caused this "foolish seedling disease" (FIGURE 39.9). By the 1930s, Japanese scientists had determined that the fungus produced hyperelongation of rice stems by secreting a chemical, which was given the name gibberellin. In the 1950s, researchers discovered that plants also make gibberellins. In the past 40 years, scientists have identified more than 100 different gibberellins that occur naturally in plants, although a much smaller number occur in each plant species. Foolish rice seedlings, it seems, suffer from an overdose of growth regulators normally found in plants in lower concentrations. Gibberellins have a variety of effects in plants.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 39-9. "Foolish seedling disease" in rice. The spindly rice plants on the right are infected with the fungus Gibberella. The pathogen secretes gibberellins, a growth stimulant that uninfected plants (left) also produce, but in smaller quantity.

Stem Elongation.Roots and young leaves are major sites of gibberellin production. Gibberellins stimulate growth in both the leaves and the stem, but they have little effect on root growth. In stems, gibberellins stimulate cell elongation and cell division. Like auxin, gibberellins cause cell wall loosening, but not by acidifying the cell wall. One hypothesis proposes that gibberellins stimulate cell wall loosening enzymes that facilitate the penetration of expansin proteins into the cell wall. Thus, in a growing stem, auxin, by acidifying the cell wall and activating expansins, and gibberellins, by facilitating the penetration of expansins, act in concert to promote elongation.

The effects of gibberellins in enhancing stem elongation are evident when certain dwarf varieties (mutants) of plants are treated with gibberellins. For instance, some dwarf pea plants (including the variety Mendel studied; see Chapter 14) grow to normal height if treated with gibberellins (FIGURE 39.10). If gibberellins are applied to plants of normal size, there is often no response. Apparently, these plants are already producing optimal dose of the hormone.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 39-10. Treating pea dwarfism with a growth hormone. Contrast the untreated dwarf seedlings on the left (control) with the dwarf seedlings on the right, which were treated five days earlier with an application of 5mmg of gibberellin.

The most dramatic example of gibberellin-induced stem elongation is bolting, the rapid growth of the floral stalk. In their vegetative state, some plants, such as cabbage, develop in a rosette form; that is, they are low to the ground with very short internodes. As the plant switches to reproductive growth, a surge of gibberellins induces internodes to elongate rapidly, which elevates the floral buds that develop at the tips of the stems.

Fruit Growth.In many plants, both auxin and gibberellins must be present for fruit to set. The most important commercial application of gibberellins is in the spraying of Thompson seedless grapes (FIGURE 39.11). The hormone makes the individual grapes grow larger, a trait prized by the consumer, and it makes the internodes of the grape bunch elongate, allowing more space for the individual grapes. This increase in space, by enhancing air circulation between the grapes, also makes it harder for yeast and other microorganisms to infect the fruits.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 39-11. The effect of gibberellin treatment on seedless grapes. The grape bunch on the left is an untreated control. The bunch on the right is growing from a vine that was sprayed with a gibberellin during fruit development

Germination.The embryo of seeds is a rich source of gibberellins. After water is imbibed, the release of gibberellins from the embryo signals the seeds to break dormancy and germinate. Some seeds that require special environmental conditions to germinate, such as exposure to light or cold temperatures, will break dormancy if they are treated with gibberellins. Gibberellins support the growth of cereal seedlings by stimulating the synthesis of digestive enzymes such as a-amylase that mobilize stored nutrients (see FIGURE 38.13).

Abscisic Acid

In the 1960s, one research group studying the chemical changes that precede bud dormancy and another team investigating chemical changes preceding leaf abscission (the dropping of autumn leaves) isolated the same compound, abscisic acid (ABA). Ironically, ABA is no longer thought to play a primary role in either bud dormancy or leaf abscission, but it is a plant hormone of great importance in other functions. Unlike the growth-stimulating hormones we have studied so far--auxin, cytokinins, and gibberellins--ABA generally slows down growth. Often ABA antagonizes the actions of the growth hormones, and it is the ratio of ABA to one or more growth hormones that determines the final physiological outcome. ABA has many effects on plants, but we will consider just two.

Seed Dormancy.Seed dormancy has great survival value because it ensures that the seed will germinate only when there are optimal conditions of light, temperature, and moisture (see Chapter 38). What prevents a seed dispersed in autumn from germinating immediately only to be killed by winter? What mechanisms ensure that such seeds germinate in the spring? For that matter, what prevents seeds from germinating in the dark, moist interior of the fruit? The answer to these questions is ABA. The levels of ABA may increase 100-fold during seed maturation. The high levels of ABA in maturing seeds inhibit germination and induce the production of special proteins that help the seeds withstand the extreme dehydration that accompanies maturation.

Many types of dormant seeds will germinate when ABA is removed or inactivated in some way. The seeds of some desert plants break dormancy only when heavy rains wash ABA out of the seed. Other seeds require light or prolonged exposure to cold to trigger the inactivation of ABA. Often the ratio of ABA to gibberellins determines whether the seed will remain dormant or germinate, and the addition of ABA to seeds that are primed to germinate returns them to the dormant condition. A maize mutant that has seeds that germinate while still on the cob lacks a functional transcription factor required for ABA to induce expression of certain genes (FIGURE 39.12).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 39-12. Precocious germination of mutant maize seeds. Abscisic acid induces dormancy in seeds. When its action is blocked--in this case, by a mutation affecting an abscisic acid-regulated transcription factor--precocious germination results.

Drought Stress.ABA is the primary internal signal that enables plants to withstand drought. When a plant begins to wilt, ABA accumulates in leaves and causes stomata to close rapidly, reducing transpiration and preventing further water loss. ABA, through its effects on second messengers such as calcium, causes an increase in the opening of outwardly directed potassium channels in the plasma membrane of guard cells, leading to a massive loss of potassium from them. The accompanying osmotic loss of water leads to a reduction in guard cell turgor and a decrease in stomatal aperture (see FIGURE 36.13). In some cases, water shortage can stress the root system before the shoot system, and ABA transported from roots to leaves may function as an "early warning system.""Wilty" mutants, which are especially prone to wilting, are in many cases deficient in the production of ABA.

Ethylene

During the 19th century when coal gas was used for street illumination, the leakage of "illuminating gas" from gas mains caused nearby trees to drop their leaves prematurely. In 1901, a Russian scientist named Dimitry Neljubow demonstrated that the gas ethylene was the active factor in "illuminating gas." The idea that ethylene is a hormone that plants themselves produce only became widely accepted, however, when the advent of a technique called gas chromatography simplified the quantitative measurement of ethylene. Plants produce ethylene in response to stresses such as drought, flooding, mechanical pressure, injury, and infection. Ethylene production also occurs during fruit ripening and during programmed cell death. And ethylene is also produced in response to high concentrations of externally applied auxin. Indeed, many physiological effects previously ascribed to auxin, such as inhibition of root elongation, are now thought to be due to auxin-induced ethylene production. Ethylene has numerous effects on plants, but we shall focus on just four.

The Triple Response to Mechanical Stress: Using Mutants to Dissect a Signal-Transduction Pathway.Imagine a pea seedling pushing upward through the soil only to come up against the underside of an immovable object such as a stone. As the stem pushes against the obstacle, the mechanical stress in its delicate tip induces the seedling to start producing ethylene. Ethylene, in turn, instigates the seedling to perform a growth maneuver called the triple response that enables it to circumvent the obstacle. The three parts of this response, which you can see in FIGURE 39.13, are a slowing of stem elongation, a thickening of the stem (which makes it stronger), and a curvature that causes the stem to start growing horizontally. As the stem continues to grow, its tip touches upward intermittently. If these probings continue to detect a solid object above, then another pulse of ethylene is generated and the stem continues its horizontal progress. If, however, the upward touch detects no solid object, then ethylene production decreases, and the stem, now clear of the obstacle, resumes its normal upward growth.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 39-13. Ethylene induces the triple response in pea seedlings. Either artificial treatment with the gaseous hormone ethylene or natural production of the hormone triggered by mechanical stress causes the stems of germinating pea seedlings to elongate less rapidly, to become thicker, and to grow horizontally--the triple response. This growth response is an adaptation that helps the seedling circumvent obstacles encountered during soil penetration. This experiment shows the extent of the triple response in pea seedlings treated with different concentrations of ethylene.

It is ethylene that induces the stem to grow horizontally rather than the physical obstruction per se; when ethylene is applied to normal seedlings growing free of all physical impediments, they undergo the triple response (see FIGURE 39.13).

Researchers have studied Arabidopsis mutants with abnormal triple responses to investigate the signal transduction pathways for the response. Ethylene-insensitive (ein) mutants fail to undergo the triple response after exposure to ethylene (FIGURE 39.14a). Some types of ein mutants are insensitive to the presence of ethylene because they lack a functional ethylene receptor. Other mutants undergo the triple response even out of soil, in the air, where there are no physical obstacles. Some mutants of this type have a regulatory defect that causes them to produce ethylene at rates 20 times normal. The phenotype of such ethylene-overproducing (eto) mutants can be restored to wild-type by treating the seedlings with inhibitors of ethylene synthesis. Still other mutants, called constitutive triple-response (ctr) mutants, undergo the triple response in air but do not respond to inhibitors of ethylene synthesis (FIGURE 39.14b). In this case, ethylene signal transduction is permanently turned on even though there is no ethylene present. FIGURE 39.15 summarizes the responses of ein, eto, and ctr mutants to ethylene and ethylene synthesis inhibitors.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 39-14. Ethylene triple-response mutants.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 39-15. Ethylene signal-transduction mutants can be distinguished by their different responses to experimental treatments.

The affected gene in ctr mutants turns out to code for a protein kinase. The fact that this mutation activates the ethylene response suggests that the normal kinase product of the wild-type allele is a negative regulator of ethylene signal transduction. Here is one hypothesis for how the pathway works in wild-type plants: Binding of the hormone ethylene to the ethylene receptor leads to inactivation of the kinase; and inactivation of this negative regulator allows synthesis of the proteins required for the triple response.

Apoptosis: Programmed Cell Death.Consider the shedding of a leaf in autumn or the death of an annual after flowering. Or think about the final step in the differentiation of a xylem vessel element, when its living contents are destroyed, leaving a hollow tube behind. All of these events involve the programmed death of certain cells or organs, or of the entire plant. The cells, organs and plants that are genetically programmed to die on a particular schedule do not simply shut down their cellular machinery and await death. Rather, the onset of programmed cell death, called apoptosis, is one of the busiest times in a cell's life, requiring new gene expression. During apoptosis, newly formed enzymes break down many chemical components, including chlorophyll, DNA, RNA, proteins, and membrane lipids. The plant may salvage the breakdown products. A burst of ethylene is almost always associated with this programmed destruction of cells, organs, or the whole plant.

Leaf Abscission.The loss of leaves each autumn is an adaptation that keeps deciduous trees from desiccating during winter when the roots cannot absorb water from the frozen ground. Before leaves abscise, many essential elements are salvaged from the dying leaves and are stored in stem parenchyma cells. These nutrients are recycled back to developing leaves the following spring. Fall color is a combination of new red pigments made during autumn and yellow and orange carotenoids (see Chapter 10) that were already present in the leaf but are rendered visible by the breakdown of the dark green chlorophyll in autumn.

When an autumn leaf falls, the breaking point is an abscission layer located near the base of the petiole. The small parenchyma cells of this layer have very thin walls, and there are no fiber cells around the vascular tissue. The abscission layer is further weakened when enzymes hydrolyze polysaccharides in the cell walls. Finally, the weight of the leaf, with the help of wind, causes a separation within the abscission layer. Even before the leaf falls, a layer of cork forms a protective scar on the twig's side of the abscission layer, preventing pathogens from invading the plant (FIGURE 39.16).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 39-16. Abscission of a maple leaf. Abscission is controlled by a change in the balance of ethylene and auxin. The abscission layer can be seen here as a vertical band at the base of the petiole. After the leaf falls, a protective layer of cork becomes the leaf scar that helps prevent pathogens from invading the plant (LM).

A change in the balance of ethylene and auxin controls abscission. An aging leaf produces less and less auxin and this makes the cells of the abscission layer more sensitive to ethylene. As the influence of ethylene on the abscission layer prevails, the cells produce enzymes that digest the cellulose and other components of cell walls.

Fruit Ripening.Fruits help disperse the seeds of flowering plants (see Chapter 30). Immature (unripe) fruits that are tart, hard, and green become edible at the time of seed maturation. A burst of ethylene production in the fruit triggers this ripening. Enzymatic breakdown of cell wall components softens the fruit, and the conversion of starches and acids to sugars makes the fruit sweet. The production of new scents and colors helps advertise fruits' ripeness to animals, who eat the fruits and disperse the seeds.

A chain reaction occurs during ripening: ethylene triggers ripening, and ripening, in turn, triggers even more ethylene production--one of the rare examples of positive feedback in physiology (see FIGURE 1.8). The result is a huge burst in ethylene production. Because ethylene is a gas, the signal to ripen even spreads from fruit to fruit: One bad apple, in fact, does spoil the lot. If you pick or buy green fruit, you may be able to speed ripening by storing the fruit in a plastic bag, so that ethylene gas will accumulate. On a commercial scale, many kinds of fruit are ripened in huge storage containers in which ethylene levels are enhanced. In other cases, measures are taken to retard ripening caused by natural ethylene. Apples, for instance, are stored in bins flushed with carbon dioxide. Circulating the air prevents ethylene from accumulating, and carbon dioxide inhibits synthesis of new ethylene. Stored in this way, apples picked in autumn can still be shipped to grocery stores the following summer.

Given the importance of ethylene in the post-harvest physiology of fruits, the genetic engineering of ethylene signal transduction pathways has potentially important commercial applications. For example, molecular biologists, by adding an antisense RNA that blocks the transcription of one of the genes required for ethylene synthesis, have created tomato fruits that ripen on demand. These fruits are picked while green and will not ripen unless ethylene gas is added. As such methods are refined, they will reduce spoilage of fruits and vegetables, a problem that currently ruins almost half the produce harvested in the United States.

Brassinosteroids

First isolated from Brassica pollen in 1979, brassinosteroids are steroids chemically similar to cholesterol and the sex hormones of animals. Brassinosteroids induce cell elongation and division in stem segments and seedlings at concentrations as low as 10-12M. They also retard leaf abscission and promote xylem differentiation. These effects are so qualitatively similar to those of auxin that it took several years for plant physiologists to accept brassinosteroids as nonauxin hormones.

It was evidence from molecular biology that established brassinosteroids as plant hormones. Joanne Chory, our interviewee on pages 718-719, and her colleagues at the Salk Institute in San Diego were interested in Arabidopsis mutants that had morphological features similar to light-grown plants even though they were grown in the dark. The researchers discovered that the mutation affects a gene that normally codes for an enzyme similar to one involved in steroid synthesis in mammalian cells. The researchers also showed that the mutant plants could be restored to normal phenotype by the experimental application of brassinosteroids. The mutant studied by Chory was brassinosteroid-deficient.

As we conclude our survey of plant hormones, it is important to remember that these chemical signals are components of control systems that tune a plant's growth, development, reproduction, and physiology to the environment. For example, you learned that auxin functions in the phototropic bending of shoots toward light; that abscisic acid "holds" certain seeds dormant until the environment is suitable for germination; and that ethylene functions in leaf abscission as shorter days and cooler temperatures announce autumn. Such relationships between outside stimuli and hormonal signals are important to keep in mind as we examine how plants actually detect and respond to changes in their surroundings.




