
Chapter 22: DESCENT WITH MODIFICATION: A DARWINIAN VIEW OF LIFE

THE HISTORICAL CONTEXT FOR EVOLUTIONARY THEORY

   Western culture resisted evolutionary views of life

   Theories of geologic gradualism helped clear the path for evolutionary biologists

   Lamarck placed fossils in an evolutionary context



THE DARWINIAN REVOLUTION

   Field research helped Darwin frame his view of life

   The Origin of Species developed two main points: the occurrence of evolution and natural selection as its mechanism

   Examples of natural selection provide evidence of evolution

   Other evidence of evolution pervades biology

   What is theoretical about the Darwinian view of life?

Biology came of age on November 24, 1859, the day Charles Darwin published On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection (see upper right). Darwin's book drew a cohesive picture of life by connecting the dots of what had once seemed a bewildering array of unrelated facts. The Origin of Species focused biologists' attention on the great diversity of organisms--their origins and relationships, their similarities and differences, their geographic distribution, and their adaptations to surrounding environments. An understanding of evolution continues to inform every field of biology, from exploring life's molecules to analyzing ecosystems. And applications of evolutionary biology are transforming medicine, agriculture, biotechnology, and conservation biology. Because evolution integrates all of biology, it is the main thematic thread woven throughout this book. This unit of chapters explores the mechanisms by which life evolves.

Darwin made two points in The Origin of Species. First, he argued from evidence that the species of organisms inhabiting Earth today descended from ancestral species. Second, he proposed a mechanism for evolution, which he termed natural selection. The basic idea of natural selection is that a population of organisms can change over the generations if individuals having certain heritable traits leave more offspring than other individuals. The result of natural selection is evolutionary adaptation, a prevalence of inherited characteristics that enhance organisms' survival and reproduction in specific environments. In modern terms, we would say that the genetic composition of the population had changed over time, and that is one way of defining evolution. But we can also use the term evolution on a much grander scale to mean all of biological history, from the earliest microbes to the enormous diversity of modern organisms.

In this chapter, you will learn about the Darwinian view of life and its historical development.




