
 Lycophyta and Pterophyta are the two phyla of modern seedless vascular plants

Phylum Lycophyta (Lycophytes)

Modern lycophytes are relicts of a far more eminent past. By the Carboniferous period, there were two evolutionary lines of lycophytes--one composed of relatively small, herbaceous plants and another line of giant woody trees having diameters of more than 2 m and heights of more than 40 m. The giant lycophytes thrived for millions of years in swamps common in the warm, moist Carboniferous climate, but became extinct when the climate became cooler and drier at the end of that geologic period. The small lycophytes survived, and they are represented today by about a thousand species. Common names for some lycophytes include "club mosses" or "ground pine," though they are neither mosses nor pines (see FIGURE 29.21a).

Many species of lycophytes are tropical plants that grow on trees as epiphytes--plants that use other organisms as a substratum but are not parasites. Other lycophyte species grow close to the ground on forest floors in temperate regions, including the northern United States. Lycophyte sporophytes have upright stems bearing many small green leaves (microphylls) and horizontal stems that grow along the ground surface. Roots extend downward from the horizontal stems. Groups of specialized leaves called sporophylls, which bear sporangia, are clustered to form club-shaped cones (also known as strobili). When they are mature, the oil-rich flammable spores are released in clouds. (Early photographers ignited lycophyte spores to provide a flash of light.) After the spores disperse, they develop into inconspicuous haploid gametophytes. Depending on the species, these tiny haploid plants may be either photosynthetic plants above ground or nonphotosynthetic plants underground. The underground species may live for as long as ten years, nurtured by symbiotic fungi.

Phylum Pterophyta (Ferns and Their Relatives)

Psilophytes. Plant biologists once considered Psilotum, the whisk fern, to be a "living fossil" (see FIGURE 29.21b). The dichotomous (Y-like) branching is reminiscent of ancient vascular plants, such as the Cooksonia in FIGURE 29.20. Whisk ferns also lack true leaves and roots, which reinforced the idea that they were surviving remnants of an early lineage of vascular plants. Thus, until recently, plant biologists placed Psilotum and a closely related genus in their own phylum. However, comparisons of DNA sequences and analysis of certain ultrastructural features, such as sperm structure, has convinced most plant systematists that the psilophytes are close relatives of the plants we commonly call ferns. According to this view, the lack of true roots and leaves evolved secondarily during the divergence of the psilophytes from the fern lineage.

Sphenophytes (Horsetails). Sphenophytes are commonly called horsetails because of their often brushy appearance (see FIGURE 29.21c). As with psilophytes, the sphenophytes were once granted their own phylum; but recent molecular data suggest that they are closely related to ferns and should be classified with them. During the Carboniferous period, sphenophytes were very diverse and grew as tall as 15 m, but today there exist only about 15 species of a single, widely distributed genus, Equisetum.

Horsetails are often found in marshy places or alongside streams and sandy roadsides. They possess both upright green stems and root-bearing horizontal stems (rhizomes) that extend along the ground. The erect stems are green and jointed, with a ring of tiny leaves or branches emerging from the joints. The upright stem actually serves as the major photosynthetic organ. Internally, horsetail stems are penetrated by large air canals that allow movement of oxygen down into rhizomes and roots, which often grow in waterlogged, low-oxygen soils. This adaptation probably first arose long ago in Carboniferous swamps, but it is still useful. Reproductive horsetail stems produce cones at their tips. Equisetum's cones, like those of certain lycophytes, are composed of clusters of sporophylls--leaves bearing sporangia.

Ferns. From their Devonian beginning, ferns radiated extensively and today include more than 12,000 species. Ferns grew alongside tree lycophytes and horsetails in the great swamp forests of the Carboniferous period, but are by far the most widespread and diverse of the pteridophytes today. Ferns are most diverse in the tropics, but there are many representatives in temperate forests, and a few are able to grow in arid habitats. Ferns often have horizontal rhizomes from which grow large leaves with extensively branched vascular systems. Fern leaves are commonly known as fronds and are often compound--that is, divided into many leaflets (see FIGURE 29.21d). The fern frond grows as its coiled tip, the fiddlehead, unfurls. Tree ferns have tall erect stems bearing a crown of fronds at the top.

Ferns produce clusters of sporangia known as sori (singular, sorus) on the undersides of the green leaves or on special, nongreen leaves (sporophylls). Sori can be arranged in various patterns, such as parallel lines or dots, that are useful in fern identification (FIGURE 29.24). Most fern sporangia are equipped with springlike devices that catapult spores several meters. Once airborne, spores can be blown by the wind far from their origin. Spores, protected by sporopollenin, are the main means of dispersal for all seedless plants.

a.

b.

c.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 29-24. Fern sporophyll, a leaf specialized for spore production.




