
 Protein phosphorylation, a common mode of regulation in cells, is a major mechanism of signal transduction

Previous chapters introduced the concept of activating a protein by adding one or more phosphate groups to it (see FIGURE 9.2). In this chapter, we have already seen how phosphorylation is involved in the activation of tyrosine-kinase receptors. In fact, the phosphorylation of proteins is a widespread cellular mechanism for regulating protein activity. The general name for an enzyme that transfers phosphate groups from ATP to a protein is protein kinase. Unlike receptor tyrosine kinases, most cytoplasmic protein kinases act not on themselves, but on other substrate proteins; also, most phosphorylate their substrates on either of two other amino acids, serine or threonine. Such serine/threonine kinases are widely involved in signaling pathways in animals, plants, and fungi.

Many of the relay molecules in signal-transduction pathways are protein kinases, and they often act on each other. FIGURE 11.11 (p. 206) depicts a hypothetical pathway containing three different protein kinases, which create a "phosphorylation cascade." The sequence shown is similar to many known pathways, including those triggered in yeast by mating factors and in animal cells by many growth factors. The signal is transmitted by a cascade of protein phosphorylations, each bringing with it a conformational change. Each shape change results from the interaction of the charged phosphate groups with charged or polar amino acids (see FIGURE 5.15). The addition of phosphates often changes a protein from an inactive form to an active form (although in other cases phosphorylation decreases the activity of the protein).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-11. A phosphorylation cascade. In a phosphorylation cascade, a series of different molecules in a pathway are phosphorylated in turn, each molecule adding a phosphate group to the next one in line. The phosphorylation cascade shown here begins after a relay molecule activates an enzyme we call protein kinase 1. 
			  
		 Active protein kinase 1 transfers a phosphate from ATP to an inactive molecule of protein kinase 2, thus activating this second kinase. 
			  
		 Active protein kinase 2 then catalyzes the phosphorylation (and activation) of protein kinase 3. 
			  
		 Finally, active protein kinase 3 phosphorylates a protein (pink) that brings about the cell's response to the signal. The dashed arrows represent inactivation of the phosphorylated proteins; enzymes called phosphatases catalyze the removal of the phosphate groups from the proteins, making them available for reuse. The active and inactive proteins are represented by different shapes to remind you that activation is usually associated with a change in molecular conformation.

The importance of protein kinases can hardly be overstated. Fully 1%  of our own genes are thought to code for protein kinases. A single cell may have hundreds of different kinds, each specific for a different substrate protein. Together, they probably regulate a large proportion of the thousands of proteins in a cell. Among these are most of the proteins that, in turn, regulate cell reproduction. Abnormal activity of such a kinase frequently causes abnormal cell growth and contributes to the development of cancer.

For a cell to respond normally to an extracellular signal, it must have mechanisms for turning off the signal-transduction pathway when the initial signal is no longer present. The effects of protein kinases are rapidly reversed in the cell by protein phosphatases, enzymes that remove phosphate groups from proteins. At any given moment, the activity of a protein regulated by phosphorylation depends on the balance in the cell between active kinase molecules and active phosphatase molecules. When the extracellular signal molecule is not present, active phosphatase molecules predominate, and the signaling pathway and cellular response shut down.




