
 The lophophorate phyla: Bryozoans, phoronids, and brachiopods are coelomates with ciliated tentacles around their mouths

In subdividing bilaterians into protostomes and deuterostomes based on embryological criteria, the lophophorate phyla, including Bryozoa, Phoronida, and Brachiopoda, were never a good fit in either coelomate branch. However, molecular data place the lophophorates squarely in the protostome branch. These phyla are collectively called the lophophorate animals after the most distinctive structure they share, the lophophore (FIGURE 33.14). The lophophore is a horseshoe-shaped or circular fold of the body wall bearing ciliated tentacles that surround the mouth (see FIGURE 32.11). The anus lies outside the whorl of tentacles. The cilia draw water toward the mouth between the tentacles, which help trap food particles for these suspension-feeders. The common occurrence of this complex apparatus in the lophophorate animals suggests that the three phyla are related. Other similarities, such as a U-shaped digestive tract and the absence of a distinct head, are adaptations to a sessile existence. In contrast to flatworms, which lack body cavities, and rotifers, which have pseudocoeloms, lophophorates have true coeloms completely lined by mesoderm (see FIGURE 32.6c).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 33-14. The lophophorate animals. The most distinctive characteristic of these phyla is the lophophore, an organ that functions in suspension-feeding. (a) Bryozoans, such as this common sea mat (Membranipora membranacea), are colonial lophophorates, many with hard exoskeletons. (b) Brachiopods are lophophorates with a hinged shell. The two parts of the shell are dorsal and ventral, in contrast to the lateral shells of bivalve mollusks (such as clams).

Bryozoans are colonial animals that superficially resemble mosses. (Bryozoa means "moss animals.") In most species, the colony is encased in a hard exoskeleton with pores through which the lophophores of the animals extend (FIGURE 33.14a). Of the 5,000 species of bryozoans, most live in the sea, where they are among the most widespread and numerous sessile animals. Several species are important reef builders.

Phoronids are tube-dwelling marine worms ranging from 1 mm to 50 cm in length. Some live buried in the sand within tubes made of chitin, extending their lophophore from the opening of the tube and withdrawing it into the tube when threatened. There are only about 15 species of phoronid worms in two genera.

Brachiopods, or lamp shells, superficially resemble clams and other bivalve mollusks, but the two halves of the brachiopod shell are dorsal and ventral to the animal rather than lateral, as in clams (FIGURE 33.14b). A brachiopod lives attached to its substratum by a stalk, opening its shell slightly to allow water to flow between the shells and the lophophore. All brachiopods are marine. The living brachiopods are remnants of a much richer past; only about 330 extant species are known, but there are 30,000 species of Paleozoic and Mesozoic fossils. A tie to the past is Lingula, a living brachiopod genus that has changed little in 400 million years.




