
 Animals use various cognitive mechanisms during movement through space

Directed movement enables animals to avoid predators or poisons, migrate to a more favorable environment, obtain food, and find mates and nest sites. The mechanisms animals use for "finding their way" vary with the spatial scale of the trip and the kind of animal. We will survey three kinds of movement that use mechanisms of increasing cognitive complexity: kinesis and taxis, use of landmarks, and cognitive maps.

Kinesis and Taxis

The simplest mechanisms of movement are kineses and taxes. A kinesis is a simple change in activity or turning rate in response to a stimulus. Sow bugs, or wood lice, become more active in dry areas and less active in humid areas, a simple behavior that tends to keep these animals in moist environments. The animals do not move toward or away from specific conditions, but since they slow down in a favorable environment, they tend to stay there. In contrast, a taxis is a more or less automatic, oriented movement toward or away from some stimulus. For example, housefly larvae are negatively phototactic after feeding, automatically moving away from light; this simple response presumably ensures that the flies remain in an area where they are harder for predators to detect. Trout exhibit positive rheotaxis (from the Greek rheos, current); they automatically swim or orient themselves in an upstream direction, which keeps them from being swept away.

Use of Landmarks Within a Familiar Area

In FIGURE 51.2, we looked at a classic experiment on how digger wasps find their nest entrances. Tinbergen moved a circle of pinecones that had previously surrounded a nest entrance and observed that the wasp landed in the center of the pinecones, even though the nest entrance wasn't there. The wasp was using the pinecones as a landmark. The use of landmarks is a more complex cognitive mechanism than a taxis or kinesis. The wasp flies toward a stimulus (the center of the pinecones), as in a taxis, but the pinecone circle is an arbitrary landmark the animal must learn. One nest entrance may have pinecones around it, while another may be next to a pile of stones. Each wasp has to learn the unique landmarks of each individual nest site.

Many animals learn the particular set of landmarks in their area and use those landmarks to find their way within the area. Honeybees, for example, keep track of the nectar supplies from their local flowers and concentrate their foraging on the flowers that are currently most nectar-rich. The bees use landmarks, among other mechanisms, to revisit the most productive flowers. In 2000, a team of biologists reported that they had tracked the foraging movements of honeybees by fitting the insects with tiny transponders (FIGURE 51.14a). Four-day-old honeybees made only short, nonforaging trips out of the hive (FIGURE 51.14b). Slightly older bees, six days old, made longer exploratory trips, but did not yet forage. Only older, fully mature bees foraged, and they moved in a "bee line," back and forth between the hive and nectar-rich flower fields. The earlier exploratory excursions were apparently required to learn a complex set of landmarks throughout the local area.

a.

b.

Click image to enlarge



Fig 51-14. Electronic surveillance of honeybees.

Cognitive Maps

An animal can move around its environment in a flexible and efficient manner using landmark orientation alone. Honeybees, for instance, might learn ten or so landmarks and locate their hive and flowers in relation to those landmarks. A more powerful mechanism is a cognitive map. A cognitive map is an internal representation, or code, of the spatial relationships among objects in an animal's surroundings. It is actually very difficult to distinguish experimentally between an animal that is simply using landmarks and one that is using an internal map. The best evidence for cognitive maps comes from research on birds called jays. A jay stores food in caches, from which the bird can retrieve the food later. An individual jay may store food in thousands of caches. It not only relocates each cache, but also keeps track of food quality, bypassing caches in which the food was relatively perishable and would have decayed. Research by Alan Kamil, of the Universty of Nebraska, suggests that jays use cognitive maps to memorize the locations of their food caches.

Migration Behavior

The most extensive studies of how animal cognition functions in movement have involved animals that exhibit migration, regular movement over relatively long distances. Migrating animals generally make one round trip between two regions each year, although there is considerable variation among species. The most notable examples are the migrations of birds, whales, a few butterfly species, and certain oceangoing fish. How is it, for example, that birds called golden plovers find their way over 13,000 km from their arctic breeding grounds to southeastern South America? Even more remarkable, some populations of these birds return to the Hawaiian and Marquesas Islands, small pieces of land in a vast expanse of ocean (FIGURE 51.15).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 51-15. Migration routes of the golden plover. These birds navigate vast expanses of ocean to the relatively small Hawaiian and Marquesas Islands (yellow). The ground-nesting plovers migrate from warm winter feeding areas to seasonally rich, essentially predator-free Arctic breeding grounds during the short Arctic summer.

Migrating animals use one of three mechanisms (or some combination of the three) to find their way. In piloting, an animal moves from one familiar landmark to another until it reaches its destination. Piloting is used mostly for short-distance movements. In orientation, an animal detects compass directions and travels in a particular straight-line path for a certain distance or until it reaches its destination. The most complex process is navigation, in which an animal determines its present location relative to other locations in addition to detecting compass direction (orientation). If you were dropped off at an unfamiliar spot and told that your home was directly to the north, you could use a compass and straight-line travel to get home; that is, you could use orientation. But a compass alone would not be adequate if you were not told which way to go; to choose the right direction, you would need to determine where you were in relation to home. You would need a complex mental picture of your surroundings, a so-called map sense. FIGURE 51.16 reinforces this distinction between orientation and navigation.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 51-16. Orientation versus navigation in juvenile and adult starlings. Researchers captured about 11,000 starlings in the Netherlands during the birds' migration from their breeding grounds in northeastern Europe to their wintering grounds in Great Britain, Ireland, and northern France. After being transported to Switzerland (red arrow) and released, juvenile starlings, which had never made the journey before, continued to fly west and southwest (blue arrows), which brought them to Spain. Adults, all of whom had made the trip at least once before, flew northwest (green arrow), an atypical direction but one that took them to their usual wintering grounds. Members of both age-groups were able to detect direction, but only the adults exhibited true navigation because they had developed a "map sense" and could determine where their original goal was relative to the site to which they were transported.

What sorts of cues do animals use for orientation and navigation? Some species of birds and other animals commonly use a combination of compass references: Earth's magnetic field, the sun (for daytime travel), and the stars (for nighttime travel). Calibrated against one another, these indicators provide excellent, albeit complex, cues to direction.

Cognitive ethologists are interested in how animals utilize cues in moving from place to place. Orienting by the sun or stellar constellations requires an internal timing device to compensate for the continuous daily movement of celestial objects. Consider what would happen if you started walking one day, orienting yourself by keeping the sun on your left. In the morning, you would be heading south; but by evening, you would be heading back north, having made a circle and gotten nowhere. The stars also shift their apparent position as Earth rotates. One night-migrating bird, the indigo bunting, avoids the need for a timing mechanism by doing what ancient human navigators did: fixing on the North Star, which moves little. Many migrants, however, use an internal clock. For example, if an experimental sun is held in a constant position, starlings change their orientation steadily at a rate of about 15&#176; per hour. This normally compensates for the change in the sun's position as Earth rotates on its axis. The calibration problem is very complex because the apparent location of the sun shifts at a variable rate, being fastest at midday. Furthermore, the apparent position of celestial objects changes as the animal moves over its migration route. Recently, Kenneth and Mary Able, of the State University of New York at Albany, discovered that for one long-distance migrant--the Savannah sparrow--the magnetic and celestial compasses are reset during brief stopovers along the migration route.




