
 Populations of prokaryotes grow and adapt rapidly

Prokaryotes reproduce only asexually by the mode of cell division called binary fission, synthesizing DNA almost continuously (see FIGURE 12.10). A single prokaryotic cell in a favorable environment will give rise by repeated divisions to a colony of offspring (FIGURE 27.9). Note that neither mitosis nor meiosis occurs among prokaryotes; this is another fundamental difference between prokaryotes and eukaryotes.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 27-9. Prokaryote colonies in culture. Microbiologists grow laboratory cultures of prokaryotes in liquid or solid media of known composition. The media, in containers such as petri dishes or test tubes, are sterilized to ensure that no unwanted microbes will grow. Then a sample of prokaryotes, sometimes just a single cell, is introduced, and the containers are incubated at an appropriate temperature. When the prokaryotes are grown on solid media, colonies are usually large enough to be visible to the unaided eye after a day or two. The size, shape, texture, and color of a colony provide clues to the identity of the prokaryotes, as do the nutrients and physical conditions required for their growth.

Although prokaryotes are never sexual in the eukaryotic manner of the meiosis-fertilization cycle, they do have three mechanisms that transfer genes between individuals (see Chapter 18). In transformation, a prokaryotic cell takes up genes from the surrounding environment, allowing for considerable genetic transfer between pro ka ryotes, even across species lines. Conjugation is the direct transfer of genes from one prokaryote to another. And in transduction, viruses transfer genes between prokaryotes. These processes, however, involve the unilateral passage of a variable amount of DNA--nothing like the meiotic sex of eukaryotes, in which two parents each contribute homologous genomes to a zygote. Mutation is the major source of genetic variation in prokaryotes. Because generation times are measured in minutes or hours, a favorable mutation can be rapidly propagated to a large number of offspring. This enables prokaryotic populations to adapt very rapidly to environmental change, as natural selection screens new mutations and novel genomes resulting from gene transfer.

The word growth as applied to prokaryotes refers more to the multiplication of cells and an increase in population size than to the enlargement of individual cells. The conditions for optimal growth--temperature, pH, salt concentrations, nutrient sources, and so on--vary according to species. Refrigeration retards food spoilage because most micro or gan isms grow only very slowly at such low temperatures.

In an environment with unlimited resources, the growth of prokaryotes is effectively geometric: One cell divides to form 2, which divide again to produce a total of 4 cells, then 8, 16, and so on, the number of cells in a colony doubling with each generation. Many prokaryotes have generation times in the range of 1-3 hours, but some species can double every 20 minutes in an optimal environment. If the latter growth rate were sustained, a single cell would give rise to a colony outweighing Earth in just three days! Obviously, prokaryotic growth both in the laboratory and in nature is usually checked at some point, when the cells exhaust some nutrient or the colony poisons itself with an accumulation of metabolic wastes. Still, prokaryotes manage to reach astounding population densities--a hundred billion prokaryotes per milliliter of fluid in the human colon, for example.

The ability of some prokaryotes to withstand harsh conditions is also impressive. Some bacteria form resistant cells called endospores (FIGURE 27.10). The original cell replicates its chromosome, and one copy becomes surrounded by a durable wall. The outer cell disintegrates, leaving the highly resistant endospore. Boiling water is not hot enough to kill most endospores in a relatively short length of time. Home canners and the food-canning industry, therefore, must take extra precautions to kill endospores of dangerous bacteria. To sterilize media, glassware, and utensils in the laboratory, microbiologists use an appliance called an autoclave, a pressure cooker that kills even endospores by heating to a temperature of 120&#176;C. In less hostile environments, endospores may remain dormant for centuries or more. If placed in a hospitable environment, they will hydrate and revive to the vegetative (colony-producing) state. For example, in 2000, researchers revived a bacterial spore that had apparently been encased for 250 million years in a salt formation within New Mexico's Carlsbad Caverns.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 27-10. An anthrax endospore. This prokaryote is Bacillus anthracis, the notorious bacterium that produces the deadly disease called anthrax in cattle, sheep, and humans (TEM). The outer cell produced the specialized inner cell, called an endospore. The endospore has a thick, protective coat. Its cytoplasm is dehydrated, and the cell does not metabolize. Under harsh conditions, the outer cell may disintegrate, but the endospore survives all sorts of trauma, including lack of water and nutrients, extreme heat or cold, and most poisons. When the environment becomes more hospitable, the endospore absorbs water and resumes growth. In late 2001, one or more bio terrorists disseminated anthrax spores through the U.S. postal system.

In most natural environments, prokaryotes must compete for space and nutrients. Many microorganisms (including certain species of prokaryotes, protists, and fungi) release antibiotics, chemicals that inhibit the growth of other microorganisms. Humans have discovered some of these compounds and use them to combat pathogenic bacteria.




