WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Despite large-scale , cross-border drug smuggling and a decline in drug seizures , President Clinton certified Mexico on Friday as a fully cooperating partner with U.S. counternarcotics efforts .
The decision , part of an annual evaluation of drug problem countries , could touch off strong opposition in Congress , where many lawmakers are exasperated by Mexico 's inability to stem U.S. -bound narcotics flows .
To overturn the president 's decision , a two-thirds vote of both houses is required .
By law , countries found not to be fully cooperative are `` decertified '' and can be subject to economic sanctions unless the president grants them a waiver on national interest grounds .
`` Mexico is cooperating with us in the battle for our lives , '' Clinton said in a speech in San Francisco .
Mexican President Ernesto Zedillo is `` working hard to tackle the corruption traffickers headlong , '' he said , adding , `` He cannot win this battle alone .
And neither can we . ''
In justifying the Mexico decision , Barry McCaffrey , who heads the White House Office of National Drug Control Policy , said that last year , Mexico implemented legislative reforms , arrested numerous drug traffickers and sustained massive interdiction and eradication programs .
He told a news conference that outright decertification of Mexico would `` devastate '' efforts to build long-term cooperation .
Nonetheless , official figures indicate cocaine seizures in Mexico were down 35 percent last year and that eradication of opium poppy did not keep pace with new cultivation .
The overall harvest increased by 25 percent , government figures show .
Meanwhile , a group of eight senators , led by Sen. Charles Grassley , R - Iowa , chairman of the Senate caucus on drug issues , wrote to Clinton and recommended that in next year 's certification process , Mexico be judged more by results instead of efforts .
They recommended that the evaluation be measured by strict criteria , including Mexico 's willingness to extradite drug chieftains , its ability to arrest and prosecute money launderers and leaders of narcotics syndicates , and its record on drug eradication and seizures .
Joining seven Republicans in signing the letter was Sen. Dianne Feinstein , D - Calif .
Mexico was one of 28 countries evaluated by Clinton .
Colombia was certified as being fully cooperative after being decertified last year .
At the time , Clinton waived the economic penalties against Colombia .
The country 's clean bill of health reflects the close ties the Clinton administration has established with President Andres Pastrana , who took office six months ago .
Meanwhile , Haiti , plagued by what officials called a `` dysfunctional criminal justice system , '' was decertified with a national interest waiver .
In the same category were Cambodia , Nigeria and Paraguay .
Afghanistan and Burma , key opium poppy countries , were decertified with no national interest waiver .
All told , 22 countries were certified as fully cooperative with American counterdrug efforts .
Meanwhile , a State Department study released simultaneously with the certification announcement said Mexico continues to be the primary route for northbound South American cocaine and is a major source of marijuana , heroin and methamphetamine .
`` Persistent corruption at all levels of the justice sector and frequent changes in personnel have combined to hinder Mexico 's ability to meet the goals of its antidrug strategy , '' the study said .
The report is issued annually and evaluates international narcotics control efforts .
It said the United States and its allies made `` solid gains '' in controlling narcotics trafficking in 1998 , citing progress in crop reduction , drug interdiction and other areas .
The most encouraging development last year on the drug front , the report said , was the continued downward trend in coca cultivation , saying the total crop `` remains at its lowest level in 10 years , even factoring in a sharp rise in cultivation in Colombia . ''
The State Department study , titled International Narcotics Control Strategy Report , said overall coca cultivation in the Andean countries fell 17 percent to 471,000 acres last year .
`` The most dramatic decline was evident in Peru , once the world 's largest coca producer , '' the report said .
`` Peruvian coca cultivation in 1998 fell 26 percent from the year before , and is now 60 percent below the peak level of 1990 , '' it said .
The 733-page document also evaluates the illicit narcotics situation country-by-country .
It said Colombia remained the world 's leading producer and distributor of cocaine and is a major source of heroin and marijuana .
