Bad weather and tensions with neighboring Iran have slashed the opium production of Afghanistan and hampered its opium exports for European heroin markets , according to a new United Nations survey .
The U.N. Drug Control Program estimated last year that Afghanistan had become the world 's largest producer of opium , surpassing Myanmar .
The opium is refined into heroin and morphine en route to Europe and elsewhere .
But heavy rains , hailstorms and earthquakes this year have wiped out one-quarter of the expected opium crop in Afghanistan , said Pino Arlacchi , the program 's executive director .
Arlacchi said in an interview that the Afghan poppy harvest this year was expected to produce 2,300 tons of raw opium , compared with 3,100 tons last year .
He said the crop failure in central and southern Afghanistan , including the poppy-rich provinces of Kandahar and Helmand , had been reported by Afghan surveyors for the U.N. program , who travel from village to village to interview officials and poppy farmers .
The rugged and remote terrain of Afghanistan , its history of lawlessness and chaotic warfare and the absence of a central government helped opium flourish in recent years while the militant Islamic movement called the Taliban seized most of the country .
When Arlacchi visited Afghanistan last November , Taliban leaders promised to wipe out opium poppy production , even making a show of burning two tons of opium in June .
They also promised to eliminate new planting in return for development aid from the United Nations , which operates a $ 14 million-a-year drug-control program in Afghanistan .
But the latest survey , Arlacchi said , showed that poppy cultivation had increased more than 9 percent since last year and had spread to two eastern provinces , Lowgar and Laghman , where it had not been reported earlier .
`` The religious leader of the Taliban would cooperate with us , '' Arlacchi said .
`` But the movement is too fragmented to act . ''
The United States estimates that Afghanistan produced 1,400 tons of opium last year , a smaller figure based on satellite photos but not ground-level research .
Its estimate this year has not yet been made public .
World production of opium may total 5,000 to 5,500 tons in 1998 , according to U.N. estimates .
Based on a 10-to-1 ratio for refining , the Afghan shortfall of 770 tons of opium means a potential loss of 77 tons of heroin .
`` It 's a result that cannot be attributed to a strong anti-drug action by the Taliban , '' Arlacchi said .
If the Taliban are not more helpful , he added , he will ask the United States and other countries that are financing a development program to use that money to block drug exports .
The deployment of tens of thousands of Iranian troops along the western border of Afghanistan this month in response to the killing of a group of Iranian diplomats by Taliban fighters has also cut established smuggling routes to heroin refineries in eastern Turkey .
As a result , the price of raw opium on the Iranian - Afghan border has soared to $ 50 to $ 77 a pound , up from $ 18 to $ 32 a pound last year , Arlacchi said .
The disruption of smuggling routes to the west has led traffickers to find circuitous routes north through Tajikistan and south through Pakistan to the Arabian Sea .
Arlacchi said he did not expect the European price of Afghan -derived heroin to rise significantly because a year 's supply is stockpiled along the smuggling corridor through Turkey and the Balkans .
