GENEVA
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- A U.N. refugee worker was killed and a second was kidnapped in a raid Sunday in West Africa , officials said .
The motive for the attack was not immediately clear .
Mensah Kpognon , 50 , of Togo , was slain at his home by unknown gunmen in the southeastern Guinea town of Macenta , near the border with Liberia , the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees said .
UNHCR said it had heard that the attackers abducted another of its staff members , Sapeu Laurence Djeya of the Ivory Coast .
The raid was a new blow to the UNHCR two weeks after the slaying of three U.N. staff members in Indonesian -controlled West Timor .
Kpognon 's killing came in a region rife with tensions over refugees from Liberia and Sierra Leone and cross-border attacks .
`` Yet another humanitarian has been savagely killed trying to help refugees , '' said Frederick Barton , deputy high commissioner , at the agency 's Geneva headquarters .
`` We have n't even buried our three other colleagues murdered in West Timor 10 days ago , and now we have lost another friend and co-worker . ''
A statement by UNHCR headquarters said Kpognon had contacted the agency 's offices in the Guinean capital , Conakry , at 6 : 30 a.m .
Sunday to report unrest in the Macenta and to say that attackers had burned the town 's military garrison two hours earlier .
UNHCR officials in Macenta were sent to check on Kpognon after he lost contact with Conakry , and found his body at his house , the agency said .
`` He had apparently been shot by the retreating gunmen , '' the statement said .
`` His house had been burned , as well as a UNHCR vehicle parked outside . ''
It said several bodies were seen in the streets of the town .
The agency said it had issued an urgent appeal to governments in the region to join in the effort to obtain the release of Djeya , the female staffer .
It was unclear what led to the attack that killed Kpognon , who studied at the University of Iowa in 1984-85 .
Guinea hosts more than 460,000 refugees , one of the largest refugee populations in Africa .
Some 330,000 are from Sierra Leone and 126,000 from Liberia .
Most of the refugees in the Macenta area are Liberian , but some Sierra Leonean refugees have fled into the area recently following attacks by Sierra Leonean rebels .
There have been several cross-border raids into Guinea recently .
UNHCR noted that the government has said at least 80 people were killed by anti- Guinean dissidents in attacks on several Guinean villages near the borders of Sierra Leone and Liberia .
It said some 50 people were killed Sept. 1 in an attack on Massadou village , about 15 miles from Macenta .
The Guinean government blamed the attack on gunmen from Liberia .
Liberia has accused Guinea of harboring rebels who crossed into northern Liberia in July and have been fighting government forces there ever since .
Tensions have been high toward refugees in Guinea recently .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">There have been a number of attacks on refugees in Conakry and elsewhere in the past week since President Lansana Conte accused them in a television broadcast of harboring anti- Guinean dissidents .</ENAMEX>
Tensions mounted Sunday amid allegations that Guinea 's military launched artillery attacks on Sierra Leone border villages .
A top Sierra Leonean official , speaking on condition of anonymity , accused Guinea of firing mortars in recent days on three villages in northwestern Sierra Leone .
The official said Guinea was trying to create a `` buffer zone '' against Sierra Leonean and Guinean rebel groups based across the border .
Patrick Coker , a spokesman for the U.N. peacekeeping force in Sierra Leone confirmed an upsurge of fighting in the region , which is dominated by Sierra Leone 's Revolutionary United Front rebels .
