MONROVIA , Liberia
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Her leg bandaged after days of walking in the jungle , a U.N. refugee worker resurfaced Thursday after being abducted in the same raid that killed a U.N. colleague .
Authorities offered no immediate explanation for how Sapeu Laurence Djeya , 37 , escaped those who captured her Sept. 17 .
`` Thank God for life , and I want to thank my colleagues who were concerned about me , '' Djeya told reporters in the Liberian capital , Monrovia , after soldiers handed her over to the Ivory Coast consul and U.N. staff .
Djeya , based in Abidjan , Ivory Coast , wore a bandage on her right ankle , and walked about to ease her legs before boarding a plane back to Abidjan .
The U.N. refugee agency said her feet were swollen , apparently from her trek .
Djeya disappeared after delivering supplies to a UNHCR base in the town of Macenta , Guinea .
Liberian Information Minister Joe Mulbah on Thursday blamed `` Guinean dissidents '' for the kidnapping .
The head of the U.N. refugee agency operation in Macenta , Mensah Kpognon , was killed in the same attack .
The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees withdrew all its field personnel in Guinea to the capital , Conakry , following the attack .
Kpognon 's death , and the murder of three UNHCR workers in West Timor earlier this month , prompted marches and rallies by U.N. humanitarian workers around the world to demand better protection for staff working in dangerous situations .
High Commissioner Sadako Ogata welcomed the release , saying she was `` enormously relieved and very grateful to all those who contributed to bring Laurence to safety . ''
The episode occurred near the border of Liberia and Guinea , which has seen rising violence in recent weeks .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Military activity has increased following a crackdown by Guinea on the hundreds of thousands of refugees who have taken shelter in that country from wars in Liberia and Sierra Leone .</ENAMEX>
In New York , the U.N. Security Council expressed concern about the very serious situation around Guinea , Liberia and Sierra Leone after a briefing by the U.N. Secretariat .
According to the U.N. refugee agency and Liberian authorities , Djeya and five refugees in Guinea walked for days before reaching Liberia 's northern district of Zorzor -- scene of alleged cross-border shelling by forces in Guinea over the weekend .
Liberian soldiers rescued her there , bringing her to Monrovia .
