GREENVILLE , N.C. --
Civil war has thrust a Greenville couple into the democratic process in ways they never imagined a decade ago .
Daniel and Dorcas , 55 and 51 , respectively , are newly naturalized American citizens from the war-torn West African nation of Sierra Leone .
Anxious to vote in their first United States presidential election , they are taking a crash course in American politics by becoming advocates for their countrymen .
The couple is urging the state 's congressional delegation to attend with them a Tuesday morning briefing on the Sierra Leone civil war that will feature six child war victims explaining the atrocities that left them with amputated arms , legs and ears .
Following the Washington D.C. hearing , the amputees will undergo medical treatment and receive prosthetic limbs donated by a Staten Island , N.Y. , businessman .
Daniel and Dorcas also are taking their story to the people of Pitt County , who they hope will urge U.S. Reps .
Walter Jones , R - N.C. , and Eva Clayton , D - N.C. , to attend the briefing .
`` We know things are done through the people , through the senators and the representatives , '' Daniel said .
`` When the American people learn -LRB- about people suffering -RRB- things can get done . ''
SIERRA LEONE AND ITS WAR Sierra Leone is a hot , tropical nation the size of South Carolina with a population of 5 million people , according to the Central Intelligence Agency World Factbook 2000 .
A predominately agricultural country , it is rich in mineral resources , namely diamonds .
A former British colony , the country gained its independence in 1961 .
`` It was one of the most peaceful countries .
We had one of the first universities in the region , '' said Ibrahim , 36 , a native of Sierra Leone studying at East Carolina University .
Because Ibrahim , Daniel and Dorcas fear their activism could result in their families being harmed , they do not want their last names published .
Seeing how the war has destroyed that education system upsets Ibrahim .
`` Sitting here in the United States I see how important computers are and I think about my son , watching him at 2 playing on the computer , and think about the children at home .
They have no opportunity in this computer age .
Because of this war they are being left back , '' he said .
The country is made up of multiple native tribes -- who practice Islam , Christianity and indigenous beliefs -- but has never suffered widespread ethnic , religious or tribal disputes , Daniel said .
Civil war came to Sierra Leone in 1991 .
A rebel military leader started the war , proclaiming the existing leadership corrupt , Daniel said .
In reality , Liberian dissidents , angry at Sierra Leone 's involvement in peacekeeping activities in that country in the 1980s , were backing the rebels , Daniel said .
The two groups also sought to control Sierra Leone 's diamond industry , according to Daniel and the human rights group Amnesty International .
THE HUMAN COST OF WAR Daniel is a former professor of education .
Dorcas is a nurse mid-wife currently working at East Carolina University .
They were educated in the United States in the early 1970s .
Although they were given an opportunity to remain here , they wanted to return home .
`` We felt we should go back home and work and educate our own people , '' she said .
Dorcas returned to the United States in 1989 to pursue an advanced nursing degree .
Daniel and their children remained in Sierra Leone , but watched with increasing anxiety the civil war in Liberia and the growing problems in their own country .
Their children came to the U.S. in 1990 and Daniel followed a year later .
`` It was a very difficult decision for me to make , '' Dorcas said .
A petite , bespectacled woman , her eyes tear up and her voice quivers .
`` In our country we used to take care of each other , we were a very caring country .
Now we find ourselves in this chaos . ''
Ibrahim left the country in 1996 with the help of a friend already living in Greenville .
His family lived in Makeni , whose residents make up the majority of the diamond mine workers .
The town is a constant battleground between rebel and government forces .
Shortly after he arrived in America , Ibrahim 's mother and 20 other relatives were forced to flee Makeni for Freetown , the nation 's capital .
No one has seen his father in four years .
`` I do n't want to believe he is dead .
But since it 's been more than four years , I believe I have a dad no more , '' Ibrahim said quietly .
An only child , Ibrahim is the sole supporter of his family .
He works on a hog farm to support his mother , his wife and son , and other relatives .
Last week he sent $ 1,000 to Sierra Leone so his family could move out of their current one-bedroom apartment into larger quarters .
He also sends the family $ 100-$ 200 a month for their living expenses .
Daniel and Dorcas are helping support more than 200 family members trapped in Sierra Leone .
Nearly all of them have been driven from their homes because of fighting .
Three of the couple 's nieces have been raped with two becoming pregnant from the attacks , they said .
One girl was only 12 years old and the baby died shortly after birth , Dorcas said .
The third girl was so badly injured during the attack , she nearly died .
One of Dorcas ' brothers also is missing .
Daniel 's sister and her family were missing for months because they got lost in the bush running from rebel forces invading their village .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Many family members are living in refugee camps in neighboring Guinea , Dorcas said .
The government there forcibly expelled thousands of refugees from the camps</ENAMEX> .
The couple 's parents also died , having been driven from their homes by the rebels .
`` They may not have been shot , but they had to suffer inclement weather in the bush and they were old so their resistance was low , '' Daniel said .
Other than his father , Ibrahim said he does not think any other family members are missing or dead .
He wonders if there is news his family hides from him .
LEND A HAND Hoping to end the war , the Sierra Leone government held democratic elections in 1996 .
The government 's candidates campaigned under then slogan `` give a hand . ''
The rebels used the slogan to inflict a new form of terror -- amputating the hands , feet and limbs of men , women and children , Daniel said .
They would tell the victims to ask the president for a hand .
Amnesty International reported 500 mutilation victims were being treated in Freetown hospitals in early 1999 .
Recent figures are unavailable .
Despite the intimidation , Sierra Leoneans voted for the government political party and locked out the rebels .
However President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah gave rebel leaders four key cabinet positions , including supervision of the diamond mining region to prevent additional violence .
`` This is how our people are , they wanted peace so badly they gave these four cabinet positions , '' Daniel said .
The United Nations sent a peacekeeping force consisting of Nigerian , Indian and Kenyan soldiers to restore order .
Kabbah 's plan failed and the violence grew .
In early 1999 , rebel forces attacked Freetown , but were repelled by Nigerian peacekeepers .
Up to 200,000 were left homeless and thousands were killed , according to Amnesty International .
The peacekeeping mission has been a failure .
United Nations relief workers have been killed , humanitarian observers were taken hostage , but later released .
Earlier this summer 11 British soldiers and several civilians were taken hostage by rebels .
When rebels staged mock executions with the soldiers , the British government launched a rescue mission that left one solider , one civilian nd numerous rebels dead .
Human rights observers have accused Nigerian soldiers of summarily executing people suspected of aiding the rebel forces .
The Indian government announced Thursday it is withdrawing from the peacekeeping mission .
NO EASY SOLUTIONS Currently the United States has 100 special forces troops in Sierra Leone training 3,000 Nigerian and Ghanian peacekeepers to better fight the rebels .
Daniel said if these troops could get U.S. air support , they would stand a better chance of beating the rebels .
That idea sits uneasily with Ibrahim , who fears rebuilding the country 's military will only result in Sierra Leoneans killing more Sierra Leoneans .
`` We 've lost the solution to this problem and we need somebody who can help us solve this problem , '' Ibrahim said .
`` We are just tired and I do believe if the war stops .
We 'll forgive .
Our country is very , very small ... this is not a very difficult war , it is not ethnic or tribal . ''
Daniel wonders if there is any other solution other than more fighting .
`` At this point I do n't now how to get out of this without further bloodshed , '' he said .
The rebels are entrenched in the mining region and he cannot see them negotiating until they are cut off from their money supply .
There are no current plans for the United States to commit additional military resources to Sierra Leone , said Malik Chaka , an African policy analyst with the House International Relations committee .
However the United States is providing humanitarian assistance by helping disarm and integrate rebel forces back into their communities and re-educating children kidnapped by the rebels and forced into fighting .
Since ownership of the diamond industry is the heart of the civil war the international community has imposed sanctions against the purchase of diamonds from Sierra Leone .
Still , sales are made on the black market and money for weapon purchases is plentiful .
Dorcas said the international community should impose a ban on the sale of ammunition and weapons to Sierra Leone and nations suspected of supporting the rebels .
`` Any country that cannot buy food for its people should n't be allowed to buy ammunition , '' she said .
Until peace returns to Sierra Leone , either through diplomacy or at the end of a gun barrel , Ibrahim , Daniel and Dorcas remember how things use to be and hope for better times .
`` It 's so lonely -LRB- in America -RRB- .
There 's no family , no children , '' Dorcas said .
`` Even though I 'm an American , let me go home and be a missionary in the country of my birth . ''
The Friends of Sierra Leone is a non-government organization consisting of returned Peace Corps volunteers and other Americans concerned about the Sierra Leone Civil War .
To learn how to assist the victims of that war , contact the organization at www.fosl -LRB- at -RRB- erols.com .
