DAR ES SALAAM , June 20 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- - Some two million African refugees are now still waiting for returning home though a great progress has been achieved over the past year in this field , a senior UN official said Saturday .
Sadako Ogata , the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said , in a statement released here to mark the 24th Africa Refugee Day , that nearly two million Rwandan refugees have recently returned from exile , as a result of the effort by many states .
The repatriation of Malian refugees from Mauritania and Burkina Faso has been completed with only a few thousand exiles from Mali remaining in Algeria and the Niger , she said .
`` We are very near to bringing this complex , three-year operation to a close , '' the UN official said .
The High Commission also said that late 1997 saw the end of UNHCR 's program for Togolese refugees .
However , Sadako said that as the Rwanda is struggling to re-integrate the refugees , there are still many Rwandans outside their country .
She said that Tanzania has helped to ferry refugees home across Lake Tanganyika to the Democratic Republic of Congo , but it continues to host a quarter of a million assisted Burundi refugees .
Sadako outlined one of the UNHCR 's top priorities for this year as the return of nearly half a million Liberians .
`` It is my hope that stability will also finally take root this year in Angola , allowing the momentum of repatriation to accelerate so that around 250,000 refugees will be able to return from neighboring countries , '' she said .
She said that while there are still over 400,000 Somali refugees outside their country on the east side of the continent , more than 500,000 Sierra Leoneans are exiled in Guinea and Liberia on the west .
Sadako said that the process of building peace in Africa can only succeed if it is rooted in a sense of solidarity among all its members including refugees and returnees .
`` UNHCR has worked in Africa for 40 years and we know that solidarity is easy to talk about but difficult to put into practice , '' she said .
Sadako said that she is still struck by the foresight of the authors of the OAU Refugee Convention which set June 20 as the Africa Refugee Day .
