FREETOWN , March 6 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The presidential runoff in Sierra Leone originally scheduled for March 15 will now take place on March 18 , informed sources in the Interim National Electoral Commission -LRB- INEC -RRB- said yesterday .
`` We are plagued with logistical problems ranging from the arrival of the ballot papers -LRB- from London -RRB- , the inclusion of some 130,000 names of refugees in Guinea and Liberia to the use of the indelible ink from India , '' one of the source said .
In a meeting with Sierra Leonean Head of State Julius Maada Bio late Monday , the INEC Chairman James Jonah spoke of `` great concerns of the commission in conducting the runoff elections on March 15 . ''
According to state radio , Jonah said the printing of the ballot papers will `` definitely require time . ''
He said that voters who had lost their registration cards will be allowed to use their ID cards including passports or drivers licence .
Jonah said that 30,000 eligible voters , who are now refugees in Liberia and 100,000 in Guinea , will be registered on Friday by INEC officials .
The refugees were not registered for the February 26 and 27 elections because clearance were not given by the Guinean and Liberian governments for the exercise to take off .
Meanwhile , pressure continues to mount for the runoff election to be cancelled and a coalition government put in place .
Catholic priests in the south yesterday issued a communique appealing to Bio `` to avert '' a runoff .
A communique issued by the Vicar General of the Catholic Archdiocese , Rev Father Simon Gbondo , said : `` The cancellation is necessary in view of renewed threat by the RUF to disrupt the coming elections . ''
There has been an increase in rebel attacks in the north and south of the country in the past 24 hours , according to reports reaching the capital early Wednesday .
At least 20 people died after RUF rebels attacked seven towns and villages at Buya Romende Chiefdom , 122 kilometres from the capital on Tuesday .
