FREETOWN , January 23 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- United Nations officials here said today that U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan `` wants a peace keeping force of up to 700 troops and 60 unarmed observers '' deployed in Sierra Leone `` to monitor the disarmament and demobilization of combatants '' under the terms of last November 's Abidjan peace accord .
`` If the Security Council approaches the peace mission , they could be in place within weeks , '' says Kathy Jones , Assistant to U.N.Special Envoy Berhanu Dinka .
`` The Security Council will discuss the U.N.peace mission to Sierra Leone in the next few days , Monday at the latest , '' she added .
Annan 's request is based on the report of an assessment team that visited Sierra Leone last December .
The blue helmeted U.N.troops will carry light arms and their job will be supervising encampment , demobilization and tion of rebel fighters .
The U.N. will also monitor breaches of the ceasefire and the force will be deployed initially for three months although the mandate can be extended .
Both the rebel Revolutionary United Front -LRB- RUF -RRB- and the S.Leonean government had pledged to cooperate `` fully '' on the issue , said diplomats here .
Presidential peace envoy Sheka Mansaray said , `` Although the Kamajors -LRB- civil defence unit -RRB- are not covered by the Abidjan peace deal , they would also be demobilised once the war is fully over . ''
The South African mercenary group Executive Outcomes `` will be confined to barracks and repatriated within five weeks '' of the U.N.peace team 's arrival , '' said Mansaray .
`` All other foreign troops will be withdrawn by May , '' he added .
Meanwhile , the Leader of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Delegation currently in Sierra Leone , Kolude Doherty , told a press conference Wednesday that 90 percent of Sierra Leone 's territory `` is now relatively safe from rebel attacks . ''
Doherty , who was given the figure after talks with the Army Chief of Staff Max Kanga , said the remaining 10 per cent of terriory `` regarded as unsafe '' is in Kailahun in the extreme east of the country near the Liberian border .
Kailahun , one of the largest agriculturally rich district in the country , was the main stronghold of the RUF throughout the six year war .
The U.N.team which is to work out `` urgent modalities '' with Sierra Leonean officials for the repatriation of up to 380,000 Sierra leonean refugees in Guinea , Liberia and the Gambia , will visit the interior this weekend after meeting President Tejan Kabbah on Thursday .
