*BY DONNA ABU - NASR SIRTE , Libya -LRB- AP -RRB- -- Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi on Wednesday called for greater African power in the U.N. Security Council and for Western countries return stolen treasures to the continent .
At a summit of the Organization of African Unity , host Gadhafi urged the 53 member states to unite .
`` We want to achieve African unity by consensus , peace and love '' Gadhafi said .
`` Africa , this continent that was considered a village for slaves , a mine and a backyard ... now imposes its respect and prestige . ''
Gadhafi walked into the meeting in Sirte , about 280 miles southeast of Tripoli , with trademark clenched fist raised high , prompting other African leaders to follow suit .
He addressed 43 African heads of state who showed up for the summit to discuss ways of restructuring the OAU 's charter to strengthen unity among member states .
Countries that `` insulted Africa and treated Africans as slaves should offer an official apology for all the human and material losses that they inflicted , '' Gadhafi said .
They should also return to Africa all the treasures and the profits they made from them , he said .
He emphasized that Africans should have veto rights in the 15-member Security Council , where only the five permanent members -- Britain , France , Russia , China and the United States -- can block resolutions .
`` We cannot remain part of the decoration '' at the United Nations , Gadhafi said to applause from participants .
The 43 heads of state were far more than officials had expected would attend .
Since last year , Gadhafi has been turning for support more to Africa than the Arab world because he believes its leaders stood by him when his country was under U.N. sanctions .
The sanctions -- including bans on international flights and arms sales and a freeze of Libya 's assets abroad -- were suspended in April , when Gadhafi turned over two suspects in the 1988 Pan Am airliner bombing over Lockerbie , Scotland .
The explosion killed 270 people .
The leaders of Algeria , Tunisia and Sudan were among those who attended Wednesday 's meeting .
But three other Arab leaders -- from Egypt , Morocco and Mauritania -- snubbed the Libyan leader , sending deputies in their places .
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat and Esmat Abdel Meguid , secretary-general of the Arab League , were there as summit observers .
The four-day OAU summit , which ends Thursday , was called to discuss reframing the organization 's charter .
It also was to address Gadhafi 's proposal to unite Africa through economic cooperation and better transportation links .
Wednesday 's session was opened by Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika , whose country is the current chair of the OAU .
He stressed that there could be no African unity without peace on the continent .
`` We cannot move forward as long as there are conflicts in Africa and as long as there are refugees , '' he said .
