UNITED NATIONS
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
The Security Council expressed concern Friday over recent violations of a U.N. ban on flights to Libya as negotiations on a proposal to try two Libyan suspects in the 1988 Pan Am Lockerbie bombing continued .
A delegation of Nigerian Cabinet ministers flew to the North African country Thursday , Egypt 's Middle East News Agency reported , the latest group to violate U.N. sanctions since <ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">the Organization of African Unity announced in June it would ignore the flight ban</ENAMEX> .
Earlier this month , five African presidents flew to the Libyan capital , Tripoli , for celebrations marking the anniversary of the 1969 coup that brought Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi to power .
After discussing the issue Friday , council president Hans Dahlgren of Sweden said council members `` reiterated the importance that they attach to the implementations of ... council resolutions . ''
The United Nations imposed sanctions on Libya in 1992 to try to force Gadhafi to surrender two suspects in the bombing of a Pan Am passenger jet over Lockerbie , Scotland , that killed 270 people .
In addition to the flight ban , the sanctions also bar arms sales , freeze some foreign assets and limit sales of oil industry equipment .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Libya this week asked the Arab League to join the OAU in ignoring the sanctions</ENAMEX> .
But the 22-member league said it would not agree to suspend the sanctions until an agreement is reached on handing over the suspects for trial .
The council said the sanctions would be lifted when the suspects were turned over for trial .
A U.S. - British proposal made last month calls for the two suspects to be tried in the Netherlands by Scottish judges according to Scottish law .
Britain and the Netherlands signed an agreement Friday at The Hague on the conditions for the trial .
The U.S. - British proposal , backed by a Security Council resolution , calls for the men to be imprisoned in Britain if convicted .
The Tripoli government has said it wants the men imprisoned in Libya if convicted .
`` Unfortunately , we have received no positive response to date from Libyan authorities , '' said Peter Burleigh , deputy American ambassador .
Libya recently asked Secretary - General Kofi Annan to help clarify how witnesses would be called to testify and where the two suspects would serve their sentences if convicted .
Annan 's spokesman , Fred Eckhard , said discussions were ongoing .
`` We hope we can satisfy them on the fine print they have asked for clarification on , '' he said .
