JOHANNESBURG , June 25 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The United States and Britain have said they accepted South Africa 's statement that it was not involved in an arms-for-oil deal with Libya , the Business Day newspaper reported Thursday .
The two countries are at the center of an international standoff with Libya over the Lockerbie airliner bombing , which killed 270 people .
U.S. and British officials said Wednesday that they had no reason to doubt an emphatic denial from South African President Nelson Mandela 's office of a story first published in the London Sunday Telegraph .
The officials were speaking in the wake of a statement by the newspaper 's foreign editor , Con Coughlin , that he stood by his report .
The report said that South Africa had concluded a secret 500-million- U.S. - Dollar deal to supply Libya with weapons and spare parts in return for cut-price oil , and Mandela had approved the deal .
Jan Lodal , the U.S. defense policy principal and Deputy Undersecretary of Defense , said in Midrand , South Africa that `` our position is that we accept the representations of the South African government and that we have no reason to do otherwise . ''
Lodal said that the U.S. had mechanisms which would have allowed it to be informed if a deal had been done .
`` Had it happened , we might have had reason to do something about it , '' he said .
The U.S. had no reason to distrust South Africa , was happy with its approach to arms exports and controls , and saw no threat to U.S. interests .
There were no open issues and differences in the past , said Lodal .
Lodal placed one rider on his statement , which he said was based on some access to intelligence sources while he was traveling .
`` Should the allegations be true , we would of course be unhappy . ''
A spokesman for the British High Commission , Michael Doig , said that the British government had taken note of the South African government 's emphatic denial of the arms-for-oil deal with Libya .
He said the British government saw no reason to doubt it .
The United Nations imposed sanctions , including an arms embargo , on Libya after Tripoli refused to surrender two Libyan suspects of the air disaster .
The U. S. and Britain demanded a trial of the two Libyans in Scotland where the crash occurred , while Libya , supported by the Organization of African Unity -LRB- OAU -RRB- , asked for a neutral venue .
The issue is in the International Court of Justice in The Hague .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">South Africa earlier this month backed an OAU resolution calling on the U.N. to immediately suspend sanctions against Libya until the International Court of Justice delivered a final decision on the dispute</ENAMEX> .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Should the suspension not be lifted by July , OAU member states reserved the right to ignore the sanctions in view of the immensely harmful effects , both human and economic , on the Libyan people , said the resolution</ENAMEX> .
