CAIRO , June 16 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The Arab League -LRB- AL -RRB- may join the African countries in an effort to bring the U.N. -imposed embargo against Libya to a quick end , a senior AL official implied Tuesday .
AL Assistant Secretary General Zakariya Ismail said Arab foreign ministers will consider swift steps toward doing away with the embargo in their next regular meeting in Cairo .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">He welcomed a resolution adopted by the summit of Organization of African Unity -LRB- OAU -RRB- last week in Ouagadougou , Burkina Faso , to conditionally lift sanctions against Libya</ENAMEX> .
The northern African country has been under an air , arms and diplomatic embargo since 1992 after Tripoli refused to hand over two Libyans suspected of involvement in blowing up a Pan - Am airliner in 1988 over Lockerbie , Scotland , killing 270 people , to stand trial in the U.S. or Britain .
Tripoli argued the two have no chance of getting a fair trial in the two countries , and insisted that they be tried in a neutral country or by the International Court of Justice in the Hague .
The stance is backed by families of the victims but shrugged off by both the U.S. and Britain .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The OAU resolution stipulates that as of September 1 , the African states will not abide by the embargo imposed on Libya if the West continues to refuse that the two Libyans stand trial in a neutral country</ENAMEX> .
Nine Arab countries took part in the OAU summit , whose resolution will `` influence the Arab decision-making , '' Ismail pointed out , implying the 22-member AL may follow suit .
`` It has been proven since the ruling of the International Court of Justice that it is within its jurisdiction to examine the Lockerbie issue , that sanctions imposed on Libya should be lifted since they have no legal grounds and only express a political stance , '' Ismail said .
AL Secretary General Esmat Abdel Meguid flew to London Sunday on a four-day visit in which he would discuss the Libyan - West stand-off with British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook .
Libya has reportedly suffered up to 23.56 billion U.S. dollars in losses since the sanctions began six years ago .
