CAIRO , July 13 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- A senior Egyptian Foreign Ministry official today called on the United Nations to review its sanctions policy to avoid eternalizing an embargo once it is applied .
`` Imposing sanctions has to be tied to a date and a specific period of time , and their renewal has to come through a resolution , '' Assistant to the Foreign Minister Sayed Qassem el- Masri said in an interview with the Egyptian MENA news agency .
Under the present policy , it is very difficult to have the sanctions scrapped once they are imposed , since a new resolution required for their lifting will be challenged by many obstacles , such as the veto , consensus and others , he added .
Commenting on the renewal of sanctions on Libya for the 16th time , el Masri said that despite the lack of change in the Council 's position towards Libya , the matter was `` well tackled '' at the last review last weekend .
The Security Council retained sanctions against Libya in a periodic 120-day review Saturday though African envoys argued for a compromise on the location of a possible trial of suspects in the 1988 Lockerbie bombing .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Elaborating , he said the last review of the sanctions discussed the proposals by Libya , the Arab League and Organization of African Unity on solving the crisis</ENAMEX> .
The U.N. Security Council will discuss the issue again in October .
`` This time in a more profound manner , '' he added .
The council appears at an impasse in forcing Libya to extradite to Britain or the U.S. two alleged intelligence agents on charges of planting a bomb aboard a Pan Am Flight which exploded over Lockerbie , Scotland , in December 1988 , killing 270 people .
African and Asian nations were urging the Lockerbie trial be held outside these two countries , by Scottish judges under Scottish law at the World Court in the Hague or in a neutral country .
Many Council members demanded the U.N. to allay the sufferings of Libyans under the five-year -old sanctions which include an air and arms embargo , the downgrading of diplomatic relations , a freeze on Libyan assets abroad and a ban on equipment used in oil terminals and refineries .
