Investigators say they have learned more about another important figure in the case , Lt. Col. Liu Chaoying , a Chinese military officer and aerospace executive .
Chung , the California entrepreneur who raised money for the Democratic Party , has already told investigators that he took money from Ms. Liu knowing that it came from the Chinese military .
Now , investigators say , they have a deeper understanding of Ms. Liu 's efforts to help Chinese companies obtain American technology with military uses .
In recent weeks , Chung has told investigators that he tried to arrange meetings for Ms. Liu with American aerospace companies when she visited the United States in 1996 .
Ms. Liu did not return a phone call to her office in Hong Kong .
There is also new information about Huang , the former Commerce Department official who became a Democratic fundraiser .
Huang worked as a banker in Los Angeles before joining the Clinton administration .
Officials said he was overheard by government surveillance discussing political donations with a Chinese official at the Los Angeles consulate .
Details of his conversation could not be learned .
Huang subsequently joined the Commerce Department as a mid-level trade official .
Because of his previous work as a banker in Hong Kong , he was barred from participating in decisions about China .
Nonetheless , officials said , Huang obtained at least one secret government report on exports of military-related technology to China , which he kept in his office safe .
Huang 's lawyer , Ty Cobb , did not reply to questions about these matters .
Huang has not been charged with wrongdoing , but $ 1.6 million of the $ 3.4 million he raised was returned by the Democratic Party because of unanswered questions about its origins .
China 's efforts in the 1996 elections came at a time when the Clinton Administration was relaxing controls over technology exports and military exchanges with China , a policy that dovetailed precisely with Beijing 's interests .
Still , no evidence has surfaced that Clinton administration officials knew about the covert Chinese activities .
But some United States and Chinese aerospace companies may have tried to improperly exploit the policy shift , investigators say .
The Justice Department is investigating three leading American aerospace companies , and some of their Chinese counterparts , for possibly illegal exports of sophisticated machining equipment and satellite technology .
These cases , involving technology that can be used for both commercial and military purposes , illustrate the interwoven lines between government and business in China .
These same complex relationships between the government in Beijing and the nation 's aerospace and arms-production companies have also complicated efforts by campaign finance investigators to untangle the motives of the Chinese .
Chinese leaders have repeatedly denied that they authorized a government plan to influence the American presidential election .
But Thompson said the denials were hollow because they left open the possibility that Chinese business interests funneled money into the American political system .
Last July , at the end of his trip to China , Clinton said Chinese President Jiang Zemin had told him that no senior Chinese officials had sanctioned channeling money into American campaigns .
But Clinton said that Jiang said he `` could not speak to whether any people pursuing their own business interest had done that . ''
The Chinese military industrial complex effectively reports to the communist government through a state council that oversees extensive business operations focused on technology development .
Those operations include the acquisition , legally and illegally , of American technology , through imports , front companies and sometimes theft , according to government officials and documents .
Technology is central to the future of China 's armed forces .
Beijing 's military strategy , once dependent on a huge land -based army , has shifted to a reliance on a smaller , more mobile military heavily oriented toward sophisticated computer and other electronic weaponry .
A recent Pentagon report concludes that the Chinese army has shown `` exceptional interest '' in acquiring and developing advanced technology , from information and electronic warfare to anti-satellite laser capabilities and telecommunications networks .
