CLINTON LIFTS EXPORT RESTRICTIONS ON COMPUTERS 618 .
Moving on -LRB- w -RRB- washington and f -LRB- financial -RRB- wires .
By Bob Deans Cox Newspapers WASHINGTON -- Bowing to dramatic gains in the speed and power of computers , President Clinton took steps Thursday aimed at making it easier for U.S. computer makers to export some of their most advanced wares to potential foes of the United States .
With today 's personal and business computers now rivalling what were considered to be exotic supercomputers less than five years ago , Clinton announced plans to relax export restrictions that were designed to keep advanced information technology out of the hands of countries such as Russia and China .
The move amounted to an admission that the pace of computer advances has simply outstripped the ability of the Cold War era export controls to regulate the sale of machines that are capable of performing billions of operations per second .
Machines that once were the property of spymasters and smugglers are now the domain of shopping malls and mail-order catalogs .
Indeed , the administration concluded that computers capable of performing up to 6.5 billion theoretical operations per second have become so widespread and easily obtainable that their sales cannot be controlled .
`` These reforms are needed because of the extraordinarily rapid rate of technological change in the computer industry , '' Clinton said in a prepared statement .
`` The number-crunching ability of a supercomputer that once filled a room and cost millions of dollars is now available in an inexpensive desktop computer . ''
His decision , after months of analysis , represents a major victory for American computer makers .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">They have argued that the controls were no longer effective , as such machines are now widely available at prices well below $ 1,500 from Asian and European manufacturers</ENAMEX> .
Continuing the restrictions , the industry argued , could result in the loss of $ 4 billion worth of sales over the next four years to U.S. competitors overseas .
Clinton weighed that position against fears within the national security community that relaxing export controls on powerful U.S. computers would trigger uncontrollable proliferation of advanced machines .
Those machines could be used to assist rival nations , pariah states and even terrorist groups in their efforts to build and deploy a new generation of threats to U.S. interests .
The threats , many fear , would include information warfare -- the attacking of computer systems -- high-tech espionage and the design and production of chemical , nuclear and biological weapons of mass destruction .
Clinton decided that the existing export control regime -- passed by Congress in 1996 -- would only fence U.S. companies out of the global market for some 5 million high-powered computers a year , without having a decisive impact on U.S. security interests .
`` Maintaining these controls would hurt U.S. exports , '' Clinton said , `` without benefiting our national security . ''
Under current law , manufacturers must obtain federal approval to sell advanced computers to certain countries , which are divided into four categories according to the threat they pose to U.S. interests .
For example , manufacturers must obtain federal approval to sell computers that perform more than 2 billion operations per second to countries such as China , India , Pakistan and the states that once made up the Soviet Union .
Clinton has proposed eliminating that requirement for machines capable of performing 6.5 billion operations or less per second .
Clinton proposed no change in what amounts to an embargo on U.S. computer sales to so-called pariah states such as Iraq , North Korea , Libya , Cuba , Sudan and Syria .
ENDIT
