WASHINGTON --
In a major rebuke of President Clinton 's export policy , House and Senate negotiators agreed Thursday to shift the control over exporting U.S. satellites back to the State Department from the Commerce Department .
Some space experts and a senior government auditor have said that controls on exports of satellites to China have been loosened since the administration transferred licensing authority to the less restrictive Commerce Department in 1996 , compromising national security .
The Commerce Department denies this .
Nonetheless , more than 10 House and Senate committees are investigating whether this approach has contributed to the release of sensitive satellite technology and engineering know-how to China that may have helped Beijing improve the reliability of its long-range missiles .
The investigations were first prompted by the disclosure that in 1996 U.S. companies helped the Chinese figure out what went wrong with their Chinese rocket that exploded while carrying a U.S. satellite .
This unauthorized assistance by the U.S. companies prompted a criminal investigation by the Justice Department into whether the companies improved the Chinese missile program .
The issue became caught up in the campaign finance debate earlier this year when The New York Times disclosed that nearly $ 100,000 was funneled into the Democratic Party in 1996 from the Chinese military through a Chinese aerospace executive who was also an officer in the Chinese military .
It was further disclosed that last February the president ignored objections from prosecutors and approved the launch of another U.S. satellite on a Chinese rocket .
Concerned about these revelations , Congress proposed returning authority for licensing satellites back to the State Department which historically had been much more cautious than the Commerce Department .
Senior administration aides have threatened a White House veto if Congress shifted the licensing authority over satellites .
At a Senate hearing Thursday , senior Defense , State and Commerce department officials urged lawmakers to keep the current system .
William Reinsch , the undersecretary of commerce for export administration , said later that his boss , Commerce Secretary William M. Daley , would again urge Clinton use his veto .
But Clinton 's troubles from the Monica Lewinsky scandal have weakened his support on Capitol Hill , and it was unclear Thursday whether Democrats would sustain a White House veto .
Moreover , the licensing provision is included in the Pentagon 's $ 271 billion budget bill for the 1999 fiscal year .
Given the growing concerns that U.S. combat readiness is eroding and top-quality troops are leaving in large numbers , vetoing the military budget bill would carry huge political risks for the president .
Thursday night , the White House seemed to be pulling back from its veto threat , even though National Security Adviser Samuel Berger played a central role in placing the Commerce Department in charge of licensing satellites in 1996 .
Berger was the deputy national security adviser at the time .
`` We 've made no decision whether to recommend whether the president veto the bill , '' said White House spokesman David Leavy .
One State Department official said , `` It 's hard for us to fall on our sword over this . ''
The satellite provision is part of a conference report worked out by House and Senate negotiators Thursday and requires full House and Senate approval .
That could come as early as next week .
The provision would transfer the licensing jurisdiction over commercial communications satellites to the State Department , effective March 15 , 1999 .
Satellites would be returned to the so-called munitions list , the inventory of the nation 's most sensitive military and intelligence-gathering equipment .
In addition , the president would have to certify that the export of missile equipment or technology , including satellites , would not hurt the U.S. space-launch industry , and would not indirectly and measurably improve China 's missile or missile-launching expertise .
Republican lawmakers applauded the transfer .
`` This change reflects the sentiment that the Clinton administration has fallen down on the job , and we need to do a more effective job of controlling '' technology that has both commercial and military uses , said Sen. Thad Cochran , R - Miss. , who has held several hearings on the matter .
Rep. Christopher Cox , R - Calif. , who heads a Select House committee investigating technology transfers to China , also cheered the decision .
But Cox noted that after a U.S. company receives a license to transfer sensitive technology , like satellites or supercomputers , to China , `` there is precious little follow-through . ''
Senate Democrats reluctantly agreed to the deal , but only after watering down or eliminating several more extreme conditions the House included in its version of the bill .
The House , for example , had voted overwhelmingly to ban all satellite exports to China .
`` There 's no effective difference between Commerce and State , except that State takes forever , '' to process license applications , said Sen. Carl Levin of Michigan , the ranking Democrat on the Armed Services Committee .
Levin said the provision requires the State Department to come up with a plan for an orderly and timely process to deal with license applications .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">But Reinsch , the Commerce Department official , warned in an interview that putting the State Department in the lead would delay the licensing process , and put U.S. satellite companies at a competitive disadvantage with foreign rivals .
`` This will hurt American companies with no national security benefits , '' Reinsch said .</ENAMEX>
If Congress approves the jurisdiction transfer , and Clinton signs the bill , the process will revert back to what had been in place until 1996 .
The administration had switched jurisdiction to the Commerce Department , largely at the behest of several major U.S. satellite makers who argued that with the end of the Cold War , satellites should be treated more as commercial products than military devices .
In late 1995 , Secretary of State Warren Christopher decided against relaxing export controls over the shipment of satellites to China , where they could be launched more cheaply than in the United States .
But Berger argued that Christopher had failed to properly consider the interests of the White House or American businesses seeking trade with China .
Ultimately , Berger engineered a deal that stripped the State Department of its broad licensing authority .
Clinton and his top national security aides insisted that the new procedures under the Commerce Department did not relax export controls or threaten national security .
But the General Accounting Office , an investigative arm of Congress , concluded otherwise .
With the State Department in charge , for example , the Pentagon effectively had a veto over satellite exports .
Under the new procedures , the Pentagon had one vote among five federal agencies , and had to persuade a majority to stop an export .
The new rules allowed for a three-step appeals process for an agency opposing a satellite export .
