WASHINGTON --
The controls on exports of satellites to China have been loosened since the Clinton administration shifted authority for the exports to the Commerce Department in 1996 , a senior government auditor said Wednesday .
But the auditor , from the General Accounting Office , an investigative arm of Congress , told a Senate panel that her agency could not judge whether the less rigorous standards had jeopardized national security .
`` We have not looked at how this process is working , '' said the auditor , Katherine Schinasi , an associate GAO director for national security and international affairs .
But in giving senators an independent analysis , Ms. Schinasi cited five broad changes since 1996 in government controls over the exports of American satellites to be launched on Chinese rockets .
Her testimony , which came at the first open hearing of the Senate Intelligence Committee 's inquiry into whether sensitive satellite technology was illegally sent to China , struck at the core of a broad congressional investigation .
Whether China gained new information by launching American satellites is important because the rockets Beijing uses to fire its own satellites into orbit are very similar to the missiles used to launch nuclear warheads .
President Clinton and his top national security aides insist that the shift in licensing authority to the Commerce Department , which considers commercial interests , from the State Department , which does not , had not relaxed export controls and had not threatened American security .
Under the new procedures that Ms. Schinasi outlined Wednesday , Congress does not have to be notified of a new application for a license , although lawmakers are alerted separately because a presidential waiver is required for the export of any satellite to China , and they are told of such waivers .
Sanctions imposed against countries for violating missile proliferation agreements do not always cover technology under the Commerce Department 's jurisdiction .
The sanctions do apply when the technology sales are supervised by the State Department .
Under the old rules , the Pentagon effectively had a veto over satellite exports .
Under new procedures , the Pentagon has one vote among five federal agencies , and must persuade a majority to stop an export .
The new rules allow a three-step appeals process for an agency opposing an export .
Technical information is not as clearly controlled under the new procedures , Ms. Schinasi said .
Without clear guidelines , she said , the Pentagon does not have an opportunity to consider sending monitors to meetings between the satellite makers and Chinese officials to insure that sensitive information is not inadvertently disclosed .
Additional controls placed on the satellites that were transferred to the Commerce Department 's jurisdiction in 1996 do not apply to a group of satellites over which Commerce took licensing control in 1993 .
In short , Ms. Schinasi said , many of the same controls the State Department required are now available to the Commerce Department `` if it chooses to use them . ''
But they are not required .
Sen. Richard Shelby , R - Ala. , the chairman of the committee , said the shift represented a `` sea change in our technology-transfer policies . ''
Sen. Bob Kerrey , D - Neb. , who is the vice chairman , did not go that far , but said , `` The process is not only complicated but lacks a central leader . ''
Shelby also expressed his `` concern that the Justice Department is still preventing information that is key to our oversight investigation from being brought to this committee . ''
The committee and Attorney General Janet Reno are wrangling over the release of reports by the Central Intelligence Agency , the State Department and the Pentagon into whether two American satellite companies disclosed sensitive information to the Chinese in 1996 .
As another part of the inquiry , Rep. Norman Dicks of Washington was named Wednesday as the lead Democrat on a proposed House select committee investigating the accusations about technology transfers to China .
The chairman is to be Rep. Christopher Cox , R - Calif .
The House committee could have a budget of up to $ 2.5 million for four months ' work but Cox said in an interview that the committee would not spend nearly that much .
The full House is expected to vote next week on setting up the committee .
