WASHINGTON --
As President Clinton prepares for a summit meeting in Beijing this month , the United States and China are trying to negotiate an agreement to no longer target nuclear missiles at each other , senior U.S. officials said Saturday .
The officials also said that Washington was pressing China to codify its promises earlier this month to further restrict the supply of missile technology to Pakistan .
The Asia director of the National Security Council , Sandra Kristoff , is in Beijing trying to complete work on the substantive agenda for Clinton 's visit , the first by a U.S. president to China since the crackdown on demonstrators in Tiananmen Square nine years ago this month .
Clinton is to leave Washington on June 24 , and the deadline of the visit is a great spur to the negotiations .
But the Chinese , by past pattern , tend to make their hardest decisions at the last moment , U.S. officials say .
The United States tried to get a mutual detargeting agreement with China before President Jiang Zemin 's visit to Washington last October , the officials said .
But the effort foundered on China 's insistence that detargeting be coupled with a mutual pledge of no first use of nuclear weapons in any crisis .
But U.S. strategic doctrine has always rejected pledges of no first use of nuclear weapons , because they are judged essentially meaningless and unverifiable .
Also , during the Cold War , there was the real concern that NATO might have to use nuclear weapons to stop a big invasion by Warsaw Pact conventional forces into Western Europe , and Soviet suggestions of no-first-use pledges were always rejected .
`` We 're not going to change our doctrine in the context of China , '' a senior U.S. official said Saturday .
`` There are alliance reasons in Asia not to change it , as well , '' the official said , referring to the reliance of Japan and Southeast Asian nations on the U.S. nuclear umbrella .
Detargeting itself , though considered part of `` confidence building '' between nations , is essentially symbolic , since missiles can be retargeted again in a matter of minutes , experts in nuclear weapons have said .
In a post- Cold War show of good faith , the United States and Russia have announced that they no longer have missiles targeted at each other , but both sides admit that detargeting would barely slow a nuclear exchange -- unlike the separate storage of missiles and warheads , for example , which some nonproliferation experts now advocate .
Republicans in Congress have expressed shock that China has about 13 strategic missiles targeted on the United States , according to a CIA estimate reported in The Washington Times -- a shock that surprises administration officials and Chinese experts , who say it is common knowledge that China has weapons targeted on the United States , and that the United States has many times more nuclear missiles aimed at China .
Among the key issues for the summit talks are those involving proliferation -- China 's exports of potentially dangerous equipment , materials , chemicals and technology to Iran and Pakistan , which recently set off nuclear-test explosions after those by India .
China , in the 1980s , was responsible for giving Pakistan the expertise , bomb design and fissile material to become a nuclear nation , and was sanctioned twice by the United States , in 1991 and 1993 , for providing Pakistan with medium-range missiles , the M -11 , and missile parts .
China then pledged not to provide any more M -11 assistance under the Missile Technology Control Regime .
While China has agreed to abide by the regime , which covers missiles that can carry a 500-kilogram -LRB- 1,100-pound -RRB- warhead 300 kilometers -LRB- about 190 miles -RRB- , it has refused thus far to sign it and its detailed annexes of banned dual-use equipment .
Chinese technological assistance to Pakistan continues , but Pakistan 's recent Ghauri missile was produced with North Korean parts , not Chinese .
Another key issue for Clinton , arguably more important than detargeting , is to get China to codify its pledge to further restrict assistance to Pakistan .
China made that pledge during a meeting of the five permanent members of the U.N. Security Council -- China , the United States , Britain , France and Russia -- on June 4 in Geneva .
At the meeting , the permanent members , all acknowledged nuclear powers , discussed the nuclear tests of India and Pakistan .
In a communique , the countries all agreed , `` consistent with their policies , '' to prevent the export of equipment , materials or technology that can in any way assist programs in India or Pakistan for nuclear weapons or ballistic missiles capable of delivering such weapons .
That pledge was vague , U.S. officials acknowledge , and they are trying to get the Chinese to codify it into their laws and regulations `` in some more enforceable form , '' an official said .
The Americans are also hoping that the pledge could stretch to include missiles with shorter ranges than those covered under the Missile Technology Control Regime , but expect Beijing to reject that interpretation .
In a related issue , the Americans are trying to get Beijing to further restrict its chemical industry from exporting dual-use chemicals and equipment to Iran that could be used for chemical weapons .
The Chinese are studying U.S. proposals for new and tighter export controls and methods .
In May 1997 , Washington sanctioned seven companies and individuals for such trade , but some of it continues .
Given previous cases of the diversion of supercomputers and other high-tech exports from civilian to military uses , Washington also wants China to agree to outside inspections of enterprises buying these devices , before the shipment and afterward .
The Chinese have agreed to look carefully at the issue , but say that their sovereignty will be violated by mandatory postshipment inspections .
The Americans are also pressing China for a breakthrough on at least one sector , perhaps agriculture , in accelerated negotiations on China 's entry into the World Trade Organization .
Membership would require significant market openings to outside goods , which would be hard for China in the middle of the Asian financial crisis , and would require politically risky layoffs .
