WASHINGTON --
When the Clinton administration relaxed export controls on high-performance computers in 1996 , it relied on a flawed report that did not study the national security implications and concluded with scant data that the computers were already easily available around the world , government auditors said Wednesday .
The opposite conclusion is true , said the General Accounting Office , the audit arm of Congress .
In a report released to a Senate panel , the auditors found that such high-performance computers `` are not readily available '' to countries of national security concern to the United States , like China , India or Pakistan .
The GAO report also said that American manufacturers continue to dominate the overseas market .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">An important administration argument for loosening export controls was that easing controls was the only way American computer makers could compete against widely available foreign-made technology .
The auditors said that `` a key element '' in the decision to relax the export controls was a Stanford University study , commissioned by the Commerce and Defense departments without any competition , that said some U.S. computer technology was uncontrollable worldwide and efforts to control it would harm the industry</ENAMEX> .
But the auditors said that the study `` lacked empirical evidence or analysis regarding its conclusion '' of uncontrollability .
The GAO also said that the study failed to do one of its assigned tasks : study how countries like China might use the computers for military purposes .
Within a year after the export rules were loosened , military installations in Russia and China obtained a few powerful new American computers , prompting criminal investigations and a retightening by Congress of the export controls .
The study 's authors responded to the GAO , and their responses were presented to the Senate subcommittee on International Security , Proliferation and Federal Services by Harold Johnson , the GAO 's associate director .
Johnson said that the authors told the accounting office that they did not do a national security threat analysis because the federal government does not have the right information to do such a study .
Seymour Goodman , the study 's principal author , disputed the GAO 's criticism of his report 's analysis .
`` We had a lot of empirical evidence and we did a comprehensive analysis that was different from theirs and that focused on the availability of U.S. -built systems . ''
William Reinsch , the undersecretary of commerce for export administration , defended the administration 's relaxation of controls and said the GAO had asked the wrong question in looking at the computer marketplace .
`` Even though the U.S. today dominates the market for high-performance computers , there is a performance threshold below which we can not realistically expect to maintain control of computers unless we restrict sales to our closest allies , '' he said .
Reinsch went on to argue that the GAO was wrong to rank national security as the top priority for looking at this issue .
Instead , he said , the first priority should be the realities of the marketplace , where high-performance computers `` are becoming less and less controllable because they are becoming smaller , cheaper , more powerful and more reliable , requiring less vendor support . ''
President Clinton announced the change in policy in late 1995 , fulfilling a pledge he made early in his administration to computer executives .
The move also helped countries like China , which could now buy more advanced American computers without any federal license as long as the technology was used for civilian purposes .
But the new rules made the exporter responsible for deciding whether a license was required , a decision previously made by the federal government .
This new responsibility , the GAO report said , was `` particularly difficult '' for companies selling to countries like China , `` where identifying the distinction between a civilian and military end user can be difficult without information that is sometimes available only to the U.S. government . ''
Now , the Clinton administration is weighing whether to further relax the computer export limits .
But the administration 's critics remain `` concerned that the policy is flawed , '' said Sen. Thad Cochran , R - Miss. , who led Wednesday 's hearing .
NYT -09-16-98 2032EDT
