Sun noted that Americans should fully understand that increasing US exports to China will promote economic development and employment in the United States .
He expressed the hope that the delegation 's visit will enhance understanding between the two countries and create a better atmosphere for further cooperation .
The delegation will sign a series of contracts related to aviation , petrochemistry and power stations , with the total value of the contracts expected to reach several billion dollars .
He said the delegation will also release information designed to attract the interest of more US companies .
Sun also addressed China 's entry into the World Trade Organization -LRB- WTO -RRB- , and noted that the nation has reached agreements with New Zealand , the Republic of Korea and Japan in some respects .
He also pointed out that China and the United States are still negotiating areas of disagreement , especially in terms agricultural products and trade related to services .
Sun expressed full confidence that Jiang 's visit will accelerate the process of Sino - US negotiations and China 's WTO membership .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">He said China has always maintained that the US government should relax restrictions on exports of high technology products .
He added that Jiang 's visit will play a positive role in relaxing the US restrictions on exporting high technology products to China</ENAMEX> .
Sun addressed questions concerning the Sino - US trade balance by saying that the Chinese government attaches great importance to imports from the United States .
He expressed the hope that the US government will remove roadblocks to Sino - US ties by providing China permanent Most Favored Nation status and removing sanctions on the country .
According to Sun , the United States should provide assistance which will enable US businesses to become more competitive in China by relaxing export restrictions , providing favorable terms for loans , and solving problems related to the Sino - US trade balance .
