BEIJING , March 21 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- China said here today that the US discriminatory export control policies towards China have hindered US exports to China and therefore have become a major obstacle for bilateral trade .
`` The Chinese Government hopes the US Government will , proceeding from the long-term interest of bilateral trade and economic co-operation , adopt effective measures to relax or even cancel the current discriminatory export control policies against China so as to usher in a healthy and balanced Sino - US trade relationship , '' said a white paper on Sino - US trade balance , released by the Information Office of the State Council here today .
`` This is a realistic way of resolving the trade balance issue between China and the United States , '' it continued .
The white paper said that Sino - US trade relations witnessed certain progress in the 1980s when the United States relaxed export control over China .
But , since the beginning of the 1990s , the United States has instituted a series of new sanctions against China , many of which involve export control .
`` This change has led to severe consequences and gradually an unfavourable reverse of trade balance for the United States , '' the document noted , adding '' it is hard to say that such a change -- indeed a double-edged sword -- is wise . ''
The US export control policies and lingering sanctions against China have greatly restricted US exports to China as well as US investment in high-tech sectors on the territory of the latter , the white paper continued .
The document cited the US export control policies as reason of failure of negotiation between China and US Westinghouse and General Electric companies over purchase of equipment for China 's Qinshan Nuclear power Plant -LRB- 300,000 kilowatts -RRB- and the Daya Bay Nuclear Power Plant -LRB- 900,000 kilowatts -RRB- .
As a result , US nuclear power enterprises , with enormous interests , have lost their chance of export to China because of the US Government control over nuclear energy technology .
Such a policy of the US has also ripped US businesses of potential business opportunities worth several billion US dollars when China planned to import technologies and equipment for integrated circuits and programme-controlled telephone switchboards , according to the white paper .
`` The United States has lost an average of several billion dollars of exports each year to China in the recent past due to such discriminatory policies , '' the document said .
`` It makes no sense for the United States to play up trade deficit against China on the one hand , and continue its export control on the other . ''
