The US export control policies and lingering sanctions against China have greatly restricted US exports to China as well as US investment in high-tech sectors on the territory of the latter .
In short , these measures have bottlenecked Sino - US economic and trade co-operation .
The negative effects of these measures on bilateral economic and trade co-operation and on US businesses can be seen in the following examples : -- In early 1980s , China conducted technical and commercial negotiations with the US Westinghouse and General Electric companies over the purchase of equipment for the Qinshan nuclear power plant -LRB- 300,000 kilowatts -RRB- and the Daya Bay nuclear power plant -LRB- 900,000 kilowatts -RRB- .
But the talks failed due to US export control .
In 1985 , China and the United States signed the `` Agreement for Co -operation Between the Government of the People 's Republic of China and the Government of the United States of America Concerning the Peaceful Use of Nuclear Energy . ''
It was immediately approved by China .
But the US Congress insisted on attaching many preconditions thereto .
As a result , the protocol has yet to take effect .
At present , China 's nuclear power industry is expanding , prompting substantial import of technologies and equipment .
US nuclear power enterprises , with enormous interests , have lost their chance of export to China because of the US Government control over nuclear energy technology .
-- In mid-1980s , similar restrictions ripped US exporters of potential business opportunities worth several billion US dollars when China planned to import technologies and equipment for integrated circuits and programme-controlled telephone switching boards .
In recent years , China still hopes to buy electronic components and related manufacturing and testing equipment from the United States .
But again , the US Government 's discriminatory control policies have prevented US businesses from selling them to China .
-- China needs to import advanced machine tools , thus providing good trade opportunities for US manufacturers .
But the US Government 's strict export control has forestalled normal business with China .
The above examples are but a drop in the sea .
Under the US Government 's discriminatory export control policies towards China , not only a large number of Chinese customers are unable to co-operate with US exporters , but US exporters themselves stand to lose trade opportunities .
Some analyses have concluded that the United States has lost an average of several billion dollars of exports each year to China in the recent past due to such discriminatory policies .
It makes no sense for the United States to play up trade deficit against China on the one hand , and continue its export control on the other .
While the US Government maintains such discriminatory export control policies towards China , other industrialized countries have , one by one , cancelled their discriminatory policies and have even provided China with governmental financial support for its import of capital goods .
This has definitely enhanced the competitiveness of their products on the Chinese market .
The European Union member countries are not only free from any trade deficit , but have enjoyed an average annual trade surplus worth several billion US dollars with China .
This comparison between EU and the United States speaks aloud on the different effects on bilateral trade balance brought by different export policies towards China .
The Chinese Government hopes the US Government will , proceeding from the long-term interest of bilateral trade and economic co-operation , adopt effective measures to relax or even cancel the current discriminatory export control policies against China so as to usher in a healthy and balanced Sino - US trade relationship .
This is a realistic way of resolving the trade balance issue between China and the United States .
