UNITED NATIONS
( AP ) --
The Security Council considered a draft resolution Friday condemning attacks on U.N. personnel in Afghanistan and the detention of Iranian diplomats in a northern city.
The draft also expressed "grave concern at the continued Afghan conflict which has recently sharply escalated due to the Taliban forces ' offensive in the northern parts of the country. ''
The council deplored the continuous foreign involvement in the conflict despite "repeated pleas by the Security Council, '' the draft said.
Neighboring Pakistan is widely believed to provide arms and other support to the ruling Taliban, while Iran is suspected of backing the minority northern -based opposition.
Over the past four years, the Taliban religious militia has captured most of the country, including the capital, Kabul.
Under its strict interpretation of Islam, girls are barred from school, most women are confined to their homes, and music, movies and television are banned.
The Russian Foreign Ministry has said the Taliban advances posed a threat to the former Soviet republics of Central Asia, and Russia was ready to fortify their borders.
Russia, a permanent council member, fears the entrenchment of a radical Islamic state in Afghanistan could bring an influx of refugees and weapons into Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.
Iran has accused the Taliban of detaining 47 Iranians since it captured the northern city of Mazar -e- Sharif on Aug. 8.
The resolution condemned the capture of the Iranian diplomats and demanded that "all Afghan factions and, in particular the Taliban, do everything possible to assure safe and dignified passage out of Afghanistan. ''
The Taliban says it knows nothing about the Iranian diplomats, but it admits to holding some 30 Iranians suspected of arming its opponents.
The draft also condemns the attacks on U.N. personnel and called on the Taliban to investigate "these heinous crimes. ''
Earlier this month in Afghanistan, the bodies of two kidnapped Afghan nationals working for the United Nations were found near the eastern city of Jalalabad.
An Italian military observer with the U.N. force was shot dead last week after U.S. missile strikes on suspected terrorist camps in the country.
The draft said it deplored "measures taken by the Taliban which seriously impede the activities of the United Nations humanitarian agencies and international humanitarian organizations throughout the country, and in particular, in Kabul. ''
Last month, about 200 international staffers from 38 aid organizations pulled out of Kabul rather than obey a Taliban order to move their residences into an abandoned dormitory.
The draft urged "all Afghan factions, in particular the Taliban, to facilitate the work of the international humanitarian organizations and ensure unimpeded access and adequate conditions for the delivery of aid. ''
