WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- U.S. Ambassador Richard Holbrooke today urged Congress to pay the country 's arrears to the United Nations , saying `` we must match our rhetoric with resources '' in the fight against mass violence , war crimes and other atrocities .
`` From Auschwitz to the killing fields of Cambodia to Srebrenica to Sierra Leone and Rwanda , this century has come face to face with evil repeatedly , '' Holbrooke said in a keynote address to the first high-level international conference of its kind on preventing atrocities .
`` And yet , here we are again as it 's recurring in various parts of the world ... asking ourselves ` why ? ' ''
He told diplomats , academics and others at the two-day State Department conference to `` first , recognize that evil really exists '' in the world and to `` denounce it in no uncertain terms . ''
But , he said , words are not enough .
`` We must match our rhetoric with resources -- empty words -LRB- and -RRB- resolutions which governments do n't even want to agree with are insufficient , '' Holbrooke said in a conference room at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum .
`` The international community must also match its words with its wallet , '' he said , mentioning Europe , Africa and Asia in particular .
Holbrooke said he was going from the conference to Capitol Hill to try to persuade legislators `` that the bare minimum '' is to pay late dues so the United States does n't lose what influence it has at the United Nations .
`` And , more importantly , for our policies to be implemented in East Timor , Sierra Leone '' and other nations trying to recover from conflicts .
In the past week , the United States has supported U.N. Security Council resolutions authorizing deployment of 6,000 U.N. peacekeepers to Sierra Leone and more than 9,000 to East Timor .
According to U.N. figures , the United States is currently $ 1.8 billion in arrears and must pay $ 350 million by Dec. 31 to keep its seat in the U.N. General Assembly .
Its vote in the Security Council is secured .
Holbrooke has been spending at least two days a week in Washington lobbying members of Congress and has said he is determined to get the United States to pay at least $ 900 million in U.N. arrears .
Congress has held up payment of arrears for years , demanding that the United Nations streamline its organization and institute a no-growth budget .
The vast majority of members of Congress want the United States to pay its dues `` and we are working with them to fashion a bipartisan solution in the interests of national security , '' Holbrooke said earlier this week .
