Russia has suggested for the first time that it might support a weapons inspection system for Iraq that would be acceptable to Western nations if Washington gave Moscow a free hand in Chechnya , administration officials said Thursday .
The proposed link was contained in an informal document that Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov gave Secretary of State Madeleine Albright during a meeting Wednesday of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe , in Istanbul .
Administration officials seemed eager Thursday to reject even the possibility of such a deal .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">After restating Russian demands for changes in U.S. policy toward Iraq , the two-page paper asked the Clinton administration to agree not to raise Russia 's military actions against Chechnya in the U.N. Security Council , which the paper stated `` is unacceptable to us . ''</ENAMEX>
Russia could then offer progress on Iraq , the paper suggested , saying , `` We are ready to instruct the Russian representative to the Security Council to be flexible on Iraq . ''
Iraq has said it would not accept the proposals now being considered in the Security Council for keeping it from acquiring weapons of mass destruction .
U.S. officials said the diplomatic paper caught them off guard , the more so because Thursday in Istanbul , neither Ivanov , in his meeting with Albright , nor President Boris Yeltsin , who met with President Clinton , brought up such a trade-off .
James Rubin , the State Department spokesman , said : `` If Russia did seek such linkage , we would find it wholly unacceptable .
We will pursue our interests in both areas without regard to any attempt by Russia to link them . ''
Nevertheless , the Russian paper , parts of which were read to The New York Times by an administration official , led to a debate within the administration over how it should be interpreted , officials said .
One question was whether Russia was really prepared to move away from Iraq to gain U.S. acquiescence for its operations in Chechnya , or whether the suggestion was made in the knowledge that Washington would reject it .
Another question was why Russia would be anxious about Chechnya coming up before the Security Council .
According to several U.N. diplomats , neither the Security Council members nor even many Islamic states seem inclined to criticize Russia formally at the United Nations , much less sanction it , for a campaign in a republic that is still part of the the Russian federation .
Many U.N. members , facing secessionists and rebels in their own lands , remain reluctant to take up an issue that many regard as undue interference in a country 's internal affairs .
Within the Security Council , Russia and the United States have been deeply divided for months over how to monitor Iraqi weapons programs and when , or if , to begin removing sanctions against Baghdad .
There have been no U.N. inspections in Iraq since December , when inspectors were withdrawn in advance of punitive airstrikes by Britain and the United States , and President Saddam Hussein barred them from returning .
Most of the new Russian paper restated old Russian positions on how the United Nations should handle Iraq .
Officials said the paper reiterated Russia 's demand that the United Nations , in effect , should be more lenient in insisting on Iraqi compliance with the disarmament pledges it made after the Gulf War in exchange for the lifting of sanctions .
The paper also cited Russia 's well-known position that the suffering of the Iraqi people should be alleviated by permitting Baghdad to sell as much oil as it likes .
It also called on the United States to end its frequent airstrikes against Iraq .
Finally , the paper called on Washington to release the holds it has placed on Russian sales to Iraq in the U.N. sanctions committee , where the United States has frequently challenged items that Iraq wanted to buy abroad .
A U.N. official said Thursday that holds had been placed on 389 contracts worth a total of $ 1.042 billion , but he said he did not know how many of those sales were Russian .
