`` You know , most of life 's greatest wounds -- for individuals and for countries -- are self-inflicted , '' said Clinton .
`` I do n't think the strategy will work . ''
And even if Yeltsin knows that the allies are not going to risk military confrontation over Chechnya , the world seems to have come a long way from the early 1990s , when the fragile pretense of civilization began to fall apart in Bosnia and every outside power remained impotent until 1995 .
Many people paid for that indecision with their lives , and hundreds of thousands more did in Rwanda in 1994 when the United States and the world turned their eyes aside from genocide .
After it became clear that inaction in Rwanda had only allowed the chaos there to engulf neighboring Congo , Clinton admitted that it had been a colossal mistake for the United States to block a U.N. mandate for a stronger international force .
Now there is a U.N. tribunal to assess criminal responsibility and try to ensure that nothing like that bloodletting happens again .
That does not , of course , mean every atrocity will now be stopped .
Realistically , it still seems likely that the major powers will let internal politics and domestic constraints make their interventions selective .
Just last week , the chief U.S. delegate to the United Nations , Richard Holbrooke , was telling Africans that while America wants to help with their problems , it remains unwilling to send U.S. troops there .
So increasingly , regional security organizations seem likely to become the first defense against atrocities .
Europe and the United States have told African countries that it is up to them , primarily , to organize international forces to intervene , as they have in Sierra Leone and Liberia .
And the European Union , wary of having to rely on the United States again , is moving rapidly to acquire the ability to raise and send peacekeeping forces on its own .
But as all of these examples show , it still takes too long for the world to get its act together .
U.N. Secretary - General Kofi Annan may have done the best at defining the uncertain progress in a speech last year .
`` When we recall tragic events such as those of Bosnia or Rwanda and ask , ` Why did no one intervene ? ' the question should not be addressed only to the United Nations , or even to its member states , '' he said .
`` Each of us as an individual has to take his or her share of responsibility .
No one can claim ignorance of what happened .
All of us should recall how we responded , and ask : ` What did I do ?
Could I have done more ?
Did I let my prejudice , my indifference , or my fear overwhelm my reasoning ?
Above all , how would I react next time ? ' ''
It takes time to rouse the world to anger , which sometimes comes too late to do any good .
So Annan 's challenge applies perfectly well in Chechnya -- not just to Americans or Western Europeans but , above all , to the ordinary Russians in whose name Yeltsin 's government is issuing unacceptable ultimatums to innocent civilians .
