WASHINGTON --
The government has responded to the threat of cyberwar with ideas and policies that are outdated before they can be implemented , a leading national security think tank warned Tuesday .
Many officials fail to appreciate the dangers of `` weapons of mass disruption , '' said analysts from the Center for Strategic and International Studies .
Terrorist organizations and doomsday sects with relatively little financing could use computers and widely available know-how to wage strategic information warfare against the United States , tapping into sensitive military communications , disrupting air traffic control centers , scrambling `` 911 '' calls and generally sowing chaos in an increasingly computer-dependent society , the analysts said .
In a 70-page report titled `` Cybercrime ... Cyberterrorism ...
Cyberwarfare , '' the center 's Global Organized Crime Project urged President Clinton to issue a sweeping executive order that would start government wheels turning to prepare the country for an imminent era of strategic information warfare .
The report -- peppered with a new pair of post- Cold War acronyms , `` IW '' for information warfare and `` SID '' for strategic information dominance -- warned that `` the possibility of an IW attack is potentially equal to any threat the United States faces . ''
The project , chaired by former federal judge William Webster , who headed both the FBI and the CIA , includes former members of presidential Cabinets , former CIA directors , retired military leaders and current and former members of Congress , including former Georgia Sen. Sam Nunn .
Frank J. Cilluffo , director of the center 's Information Warfare Task Force , directed the team of analysts who wrote the report .
`` The United States ... has erected immensely complex information systems on insecure foundations , '' the report warned .
`` The economy is totally dependent on these systems .
America 's adversaries and enemies recognize this dependency and are developing weapons of mass disruption and mass destruction . ''
The report adds that Pentagon information warfare specialists have estimated that for $ 10 million -- a fraction of the reported wealth of America 's most wanted transnational terrorist , Osama bin Laden -- 30 computer wizards strategically located around the world `` could bring the United States to its knees . ''
`` U.S .
policy makers are responding to this 21st-century threat with 20th-century thinking , '' the center said .
Proposed responses have underestimated the IW threat , have failed to take into account possible conflicts with information revolution business interests or existing laws and have lacked long-range strategy , the report said .
`` The more significant failing of current policy is that it focuses on vulnerabilities , not on long-term strategy for U.S. security and dominance , '' the CSIS analysts said .
The report said a presidential directive that goes beyond recent orders is needed to start a top-down review of existing IW responsibilities , develop both defensive and offensive IW policies and identify high-priority functions for maintaining national defense , rule of law , emergency preparedness and continuity of government in the event of an attack .
Because of overlaps between public and private institutions , the analysts urged the government must do more to enlist cooperation of telecommunications and information industries , not merely to protect against attack but also to provide talent for building protective infrastructure .
Efforts to protect the country against IW should be part of a broader review of the impact of the information revolution on national security , the analysts said .
`` To date , no U.S. policy review has considered how the information revolution has affected the country 's beliefs about security or proper preparations for dealing with such threats , '' the report stated .
Organized in 1962 and originally affiliated with Georgetown University , CSIS is now an independent research institution focusing on international policy issues .
ENDIT
