WASHINGTON --
Dear Fidel Castro : Please come to Seattle .
That 's the invitation sent to the Cuban leader by Rep. Jim McDermott , a majority of the Seattle City Council , and a minority of the Metropolitan King County Council .
The elected officials , undaunted by what Secretary of State Madeleine Albright last week called `` growing concern about Cuba 's dismal human rights '' record , sent separate letters urging Castro to attend the meeting of the World Trade Organization in Seattle beginning Nov. 30 .
It is not clear that Castro needs a invitation from Seattle to attend the meeting -- Cuba is an active member of the organization attended a WTO meeting in Geneva last year .
But McDermott , unhappy that Castro had been snubbed by New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani when the Cuban leader attended a celebration of the 50th anniversary of the United Nations in New York in 1995 , wanted Castro to know he would be more welcome in Seattle .
`` I believe that our entire community would be eager to hear from you , discuss with you , and probably debate with you about the future of our relationship , '' McDermott , a Seattle Democrat , wrote to Castro .
`` You will be received respectfully , graciously and warmly . ''
McDermott described himself in the letter as an opponent of the U.S. trade embargo against Cuba who visited the nation in 1992 .
McDermott also touted what he said was Seattle 's `` long history of involvement with Cuba . ''
`` Seattle was one of the most ardent supporters of the Venceramos Brigades of the late 1960s and early 1970s , '' McDermott wrote .
`` In fact , several of Seattle 's prominent political and business leaders were Venceramos Brigade graduates or supporters . ''
-LRB- In 1970 , a group of young Seattleites chartered a Greyhound bus for Canada and then boarded a freighter for Cuba , where they spent several months helping to harvest sugar cane .
They returned denouncing U.S. policy toward Cuba . -RRB-
The members of the city and county councila wrote somewhat less enthusiastic letters urging Castro to attend .
`` In the expectation that Cuba , as a founding and current member of the World Trade Organization , will be sending a delegation to Seattle ... we hope you will take this opportunity to personally visit us , '' wrote five of the nine City Council members , including President Sue Donaldson and members Nick Licata , Richard McIver , Tina Podlodowski and Peter Steinbrueck .
`` There is much that we hope that you could learn from your visit to increase trade between our region and our nation . ''
The County Council letter was signed by five of the 13 members , all Democrats .
`` Should you decide to lead the Cuban delegation to this historic event , we would be honored to have you visit with us , '' wrote council members Maggi Fimia , Larry Gossett , Greg Nickels , Dwight Pelz and Larry Phillips .
`` We think your visit here will be a very educational and enriching experience , both for you and the people who reside in communities throughout our region of the country . ''
One Republican county councilman , Peter von Reichbauer , said he did n't sign the letter only because he was n't asked , but that he had no objection to its contents .
`` I happen to be a strong believer in free trade , and I believe that by inviting Fidel Castro to Seattle , we recognize he is the leader of a nation in our regional sphere of influence as well as internationally , '' von Reichbauer said .
`` It would be shortsighted not to invite him to participate in the WTO meeting . ''
But two City Council members said they declined to sign the letter because they oppose the sentiment .
`` I do not think it 's appropriate because of our -LRB- lack of -RRB- diplomatic relations with him , '' said City Councilwoman Martha Choe .
`` I was embarrassed by the letter .
I took one look at and said , ` I 'm not signing it . ' ''
Councilman Richard Conlin said it was inappropriate to single out only one head of state to invite .
`` I would feel differently if he was a hero -- if it was Winston Churchill after World War II , '' Conlin said .
But Licata said he signed as a courtesy to McDermott .
`` The World Trade Organization is open to a wide variety of organizations , and inviting Castro would encourage a more fuller discussion of the WTO 's role , '' Licata said .
`` And we might get some business out of this .
I 'm concerned about improving trade opportunities . ''
Washington Council on International Trade President Patricia Davis said she believes it is up to President Clinton to decide which world leaders to invite , because the WTO meeting is geared for trade ministers .
She said Seattle would welcome any world leader who chose to attend .
Cuba is so politically touchy that the United States Trade Representative 's office declined to comment on the letters to Castro .
State Department officials were not immediately available for comment last night , and a spokesman at the Cuban government 's interest section in Washington , D.C. , said he did not know whether Castro would attend the gathering .
Washington state is heavily dependent on exports , and industries such as aerospace and agriculture have chafed under the strictures of the United States ' many economic sanctions against other countries .
The state 's pea and lentil growers in particular have mourned the loss of Cuba as a trading partner , because it had been the largest mporter of those commodities in the late 1950s .
Castro took power in Cuba on Jan. 1 , 1959 , and , according to the State Department , consolidated his power by imprisoning or executing opponents .
Castro declared Cuba a socialist state in 1961 , and maintained close relations with the Soviet Union until its demise in 1991 .
The State Department says the Cuban government 's human rights record is `` abysmal '' and that `` it systematically violates fundamental civil and political rights of its citizens .
The United States has maintained an economic embargo against Cuba since 1962 .
