UNITED NATIONS , October 24 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The United Nations was capable of internal change and would play a very important role in the coming century , Hennadiy Udovenko , president of the General Assembly of the United Nations , said here today .
Speaking on the occasion of the United Nations Day , October 24 , Udovenko said it was a well-recognized fact that with the end of the cold war on the one hand , and the advent of globalization on the other , the United Nations found itself dealing with an entirely new array of crises , conflicts and problems .
The president said that its tasks multipied , just as its resources dwindled , and it was asked to do more , but to do it with less .
As calls for change grew louder , some critics began to question the organization 's ability to be an effective mechanism for the challenges of a new era .
The president said that at the United Nations , hardly anybody had ever doubted that the organization was strong enough and flexible enough to step into the next century .
He said the UN reform engine was running smoothly and getting ready to switch into high gear .
The General Assembly was in the process of considering a package of the secretary-general 's measures and proposals on renewing the organization .
Udovenko said that in and of itself , the consideration , conducted in a transparent and businesslike manner with the involvement of all interested member states , underscored the democratic nature of the United Nations as a whole and the General Assembly in particular as its main deliberative and legislative body .
The president stressed that in the meantime , a number of important steps had already been taken to rationalize and streamline United Nations operations and to promote a new institutional culture .
He noted all of this served to show the United Nations was not only a mere survivor , but a flexible and dynamic organism .
Allowing nations to cope with global problems through collective deliberation and joint actions , it was an indispensable instrument to take with the world into the next millennium .
There was no doubt that the United Nations would play a very important role in the coming century .
