UNITED NATIONS , December 19 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The United Nations found itself facing more challenges than opportunities in 1997 , with a worsening financial crisis attracting the attention of the world .
For over half a century , the United Nations has played an irreplaceable role in promoting world peace , security and advancing the development of the world economy .
But since the end of the Cold War , it has become more and more difficult for the world body to meet the growing demands of its member countries .
The first problem is that the member states cannot agree upon the mission and objective of the United Nations .
While some countries argue that the United Nations should put more emphasis on peace-keeping operations , the others believe that economic development is more important .
The member states also have different opinions on whether the United Nations should simply talk about human rights or should put great efforts in solving social problems such as poverty and the population explosion .
The second is the reform .
With the changing of international relations after the Cold War , the reform of the world body has become the common wish of member states .
But the different interests of the member states have made it very difficult for the reform to go forward .
The United States and some other Western countries maintain that reform should be limited to reduction of agencies , personnel , budgets and costs .
The developing countries , on the other hand , push for some in-depth and constitutional reforms so that member states can treat each other on a more equal footing .
The financial crisis is the third problem facing the world body .
Under the U.N. Charter , the United Nations can only rely financially on the contributions of member states .
Now it is owed a total of 2.5 billion U.S. dollars by member states .
Out of which the debt of the United States accounts for 60 percent .
To keep the daily work going uninterrupted , the United Nations has to borrow from the peace-keeping account , which in turn damages the interests of the countries that provide troops to the U.N. peacekeeping operations by delaying their fund return .
Despite the urgent and repeated appeals of the U.N. Secretary - General Kofi Annan and many member states , the United States has refused to pay its debt in full .
The fourth problem lies in the tendency of over emphasizing the importance of peace-keeping operations , while neglecting development assistance under the pressure of some Western countries .
The developing countries are quite dissatisfied with the tendency and warned that if their economic development is delayed , environment deteriorated or poverty situation worsened , the developed countries will also be affected to a very large extent .
The fifth problem is that there are more expectations than actions in the United Nations .
Some countries are enthusiastic about bilateral diplomacy and treat the United Nations as an international forum .
Under such a situation , it is unavoidable that there are more discussions than decisions , more decisions than actions .
It is no longer a rare case when a U.N. resolution is violated .
The United States insists that the United Nations need reform , but at the same time it tries every means to twist the world body to serve its national interests for world hegemonism .
As the top executive of the United Nations , Kofi Annan is both worried and dissatisfied with the current situation .
He has said many times that unless thorough and fundamental changes occur , the United Nations will not go into the next century as a vigorous international organization .
Since he resumed office at the beginning of this year , Annan has been working hard to reform the world body .
In March he recommended 29 reform measures and in July 15 reform suggestions .
He hopes the United Nations will have a clearer mission , so that its actions can become more coherent and responsive .
Although as difficult as wire-walking , the reform process has moved forward .
Looking ahead , the United Nations faces more challenges than opportunities .
If the member states can set aside differences and reach consensus for the sake of human peace and development , the United Nations will continue to serve its special role in many international fields .
