CAIRO , May 13 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Leaders of Group of 15 -LRB- G -15 -RRB- Wednesday denounced foreign intervention in their domestic affairs and called for cementing internal solidarity in the southern hemisphere .
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak , appearing with presidents , vice-presidents and ministers of other 15 developing countries at a joint press conference , strongly criticized any kind of foreign interference on the pretext of protecting human rights .
`` Intervention in internal affair is something we cannot condone ...not any country can accept it , '' he said , adding that the governments of many developing countries have reiterated this stance over and over .
`` We believe in people 's rights to education , work , freedom , democracy , but not the pretension of some NGOs -LRB- non-government organizations '' which always try to point an accusing finger at developing countries , Mubarak added .
He was obviously in response to charges of alleged human rights abuses in Egypt and other developing countries .
The United States has threatened to impose sanctions on a number of countries on the ground .
Mubarak told the press conference held at the end of the three-day G -15 summit here that the summit was held at a `` delicate juncture of international relations , '' coupled with the the repercussions of Southeast Asian financial crisis and prospects for greater global integration .
As the current chairman of G -15 , he said the summit at its final session and the joint communique stressed the need to consolidate cooperation among its member states in particular and the developing countries in general .
`` It is still important to promote south-south cooperation in a bid to ease the sufferings and develop the national economies of developing states , '' he said .
In order to reach a common understanding for realizing justice and equality , the summit also urged for intensifying dialog between the North and the South to the benefits of both , Mubarak said .
Brazilian Vice President Marco Maciel said his country believes in a constructive South - North dialog , but South - South cooperation is `` of utmost importance . ''
He said that cooperation and coordination among Latin - American countries have been successful and they will expand to other continents .
Meanwhile , Malaysia Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad recommended continued cooperation on both tracks .
`` We should continue our interest and our relation with the North , because they have the market and the money , know-how , technology and set-up .
At the same time we realized North has always been interested in investing and using the market of the South , '' he said .
However , Mahathir noted that it is equally important the South make use of their own markets in order to develop their economies .
`` This is why G -15 was born and concentrates on South - South cooperation , '' he added .
He said trade and economic kinship between Malaysia and its southern partners has seen tremendous increases , for example , with a 300 percent rise in trade volume with Latin American .
South - South cooperation , South - North dialog and Asian financial crisis have topped the topics of the G -15 summit which brought together leaders of the 16 member states to Egypt on May 11-13 .
The G -15 , founded in 1989 , is actually a G -15 plus one after Kenya became the 16th member in 1997 , joining Algeria , Argentina , Brazil , Chile , Egypt , India , Indonesia , Jamaica , Malaysia , Mexico , Nigeria , Peru , Senegal , Venezuela and Zimbabwe .
