ADDIS ABABA , December 10 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Salim Ahmed Salim , Secretary General of the Organization of African Unity -LRB- OAU -RRB- , today appealed to concerned parties of the Comoros to `` put the interest of the country above all else '' .
The call was made by Salim at the opening session of a four-day international conference on Comoros here this afternoon .
The conference is being attended by various delegations representing the Comoroian government , different political forces and islands , including islands of Anjouan , Moheli and Grand Comoro .
Salim pointed out that this conference is aimed at assisting in resolving the current crisis and creating conditions for tackling the real crisis facing the islands .
`` Unless the issue of poverty and underdevelopment is seriously addressed , the islands will continue to be faced with instability , '' he noted .
Being cognizant of this reality , the OAU , working in tandem with the League of Arab States , the European Union , the United Nations and others is determined to mobilize international support and assistance for socio-economic development of the Comoros with particular focus that such assistnace should benefit all the islands , Salim said .
He said , `` We must urgently overcome the current crisis , create an enabling environment for understanding and cooperation among the islanders which is essential for the return of peace and stability . ''
Salim mentioned two fundamental factors in their consulations , that are `` the legitimate concerns and interests of all the islands '' and `` the need to preserve the unity and territorial integrity of the country '' .
This is important not only for the Comoros but for the continent as a whole , Salim stressed .
He hoped the Comorian delegations to `` put national consideration at the top of the agenda '' and to reach greater understanding# , greater cohesion and greater solidarity among the people of the Comoros .
The opening session presided by Salim was attended by observers from the League of Arab States , the United Nations , the Organization of Islamic Conference , the European Union , the neighboring countries of the Comoros , the Central Organ of the OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention , Management and Resolution , the permanent members of the UN Secutriy Council and others .
