UNITED NATIONS , September 24 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Peace and stability in Africa are part and parcel of peace , stability and development in the world , Chinese Foreign Minister Tang Jiaxuan said here Thursday .
Addressing the Security Council 's second ministerial meeting on Africa , Tang said that `` without development of Africa , there will be no prosperity of the world . ''
`` Members of the international community , developed countries in particular , have an obligation to promote stability in Africa , and more importantly , to help African countries to shake off poverty and develop their economy , '' he said .
`` Given the great number of its countries , Africa is an important political force in international affairs that cannot be neglected , '' he said .
`` Africa is a promising continent with great potential in international economic development . ''
African countries make up some one-third of the total 185 member states of the United Nations .
On recent frequent conflicts in Africa , Tang said , `` It is our sincere hope that the relevant African countries will , in the spirit of national reconciliation , take into consideration the fundamental and long-term interests of their states and people , and properly settle their disputes through negotiations on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence . ''
Tang also called on African countries to `` avoid conflicts , iron out their differences and join hands in a concerted effort to contribute to peace and stability in Africa . ''
`` We are of the view that the Security Council has an inescapable obligation to maintain peace and stability in Africa , '' he said .
`` The U.N. should strengthen its coordination with the OAU -LRB- Organization of African Unity -RRB- in resolving the conflicts in Africa , earnestly consider the reasonable propositions and demands of the African countries , and support their efforts in maintaining the regional peace and security and defending their state sovereignty and territorial integrity , '' he said .
`` As one of the permanent members of the Security Council , China has all along attached importance to peace and development in Africa , '' he said .
`` China has always stood by the African countries in their legitimate demands and reasonable propositions , and supported their endeavors to maintain political stability and promote economic growth and their useful efforts aimed at enhancing African unity and regional cooperation , '' he said .
`` China will as always strengthen its friendly relations and cooperation with the African countries and make further contributions to the promotion of peace , stability and development in Africa , '' he added .
Foreign ministers from countries including Brazil , France , the United Kingdom and the United States also took the floor to air their views on Africa at the ministerial meeting , held on the sidelines of the 53rd General Assembly session .
The Security Council held the first ministerial meeting on Africa in September last year .
