UNITED NATIONS , November 7 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Chinese representative Yuan Shaofu today urged the international community to implement the spirit of Midran Declaration and create a conducive economic environment for the developing countries .
Speaking at the Second Committee -LRB- Economic and Financial -RRB- of the U.N. General Assembly , Yuan said that the process of the globalization and liberalization of the world economy is a contest in economic power and technical capabilities , which has created opportunities for economic growth and development and at the same time presented serious challenges to the weak economies that fine themselves in a disadvantageous position in the contest .
The low level of economic development and technology of the developing countries as a whole and their lack of essential competitive edge makes it difficult for them to benefit from globalization and liberalization in short or medium terms , he said .
The least developed countries and those with a fragile economic structure in particular face an increasingly great danger of marginalization as a result of their weak economic foundation and unstable internal environment , he stressed .
`` The fact that the development of the developing countries has lagged behind will seriously impede the development of the world economy as a whole , '' he said .
`` Only when more countries are mainstreamed in the economic development of the world , can development be truly globalized , '' he said .
As some western countries intend to weaken or even abolish the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development -LRB- UNCTAD -RRB- , he said that UNCTAD is the only intergovernmental body within the UN system that considers trade , investment and other related issues from the perspective of development and in a comprehensive manner .
`` UNCTAD with 188 member states is the most universal intergovernmental body on the question of trade and development and therefore should become an important and integral part of the global multilateral trade system and continue to participate from the perspective of development in the formulation of policies and rules governing global trade so that they can reflect , in a balanced manner , the interests of all countries and especially the effects they may have on the developing countries , '' he said .
He also said that a link should be established between UNCTAD and the World Trade Organization so that they can compliment , support and interact with each other .
