UNITED NATIONS , September 6 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Chinese President Jiang Zemin on Wednesday called for the strengthening of the United Nations ' positive role , and the defense of the world body 's authority , in the new century .
In a speech delivered at the U.N. Millennium Summit , Jiang said that the organization 's `` positive role must be strengthened and not weakened and its authority defended and not jeopardized . ''
`` We must firmly defend the purposes and principles of the U.N. Charter , continue to give play to the positive role of the U.N. and its Security Council in handling international affairs and safeguarding world peace , and ensure all the member states their right to participate in world affairs on an equal footing , '' he stressed .
`` In handling international affairs , '' he said , `` no country or group of countries should take an attitude of ` using the United Nations when it is needed and abandon it when it is not . ' ''
Jiang said that the U.N. , which came into being at the historic moment of great victory in the world 's anti-fascist war 55 years ago , should be a place where all its member states discuss and address international affairs through democratic means .
The U.N. and its Security Council should go along with the trend of history and carry out reforms as necessary and appropriate under the principle of equitable geographical distribution , so as to give expression to the will of all its member states , developing countries in particular , he noted .
Over half a century and more , with the support of its member states , the U.N. has done much useful work to ease regional conflicts , eliminate old colonialism and promote world peace , cooperation and development , Jiang said .
`` As the most authoritative international organization of sovereign states with the broadest representation in the world , '' he emphasized , `` the U.N. plays an irreplaceable role in the maintenance of world peace , promotion of common development , and establishment of a fair and reasonable new international political and economic order . ''
