UNITED NATIONS , September 7 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Chinese President Jiang Zemin on Thursday offered a four-point view on the strengthening of the United Nations ' role in the new century in order to meet the need of the international situation and the requirements of the times .
Addressing the interactive round-table session of the U.N. Millennium Summit , Jiang said that the 55-year -old U.N. should and can play a bigger role in the new century , and that strengthening the world body 's role is `` the common task '' facing all countries in the world .
In his speech , Jiang called for promoting the purposes and principles of the U.N. Charter , upholding the authority of the Security Council , enhancing the U.N. role in promoting development and promoting the democratic decision-making system in the world body as ways to strengthen its U.N. role .
`` We should work together to promote the purposes and principles of the U.N. Charter , '' Jiang said , adding that `` Facts have proved that the purposes and principles of the U.N. Charter remain valid and relevant . ''
The Charter is a guide for state-to-state relations and it has identified a road for all countries to follow and set rules for them to abide by , he stressed .
Jiang also urged all countries to work together to uphold the authority of the Security Council .
`` It is the primary responsibility and lofty mission of the U.N. Security Council to maintain international peace and security as entrusted by the U.N. charter , '' he said , adding that it is a solemn commitment of all U.N. member states to ensure the Council fulfill its responsibility .
`` The Security Council is the core of the collective security mechanism .
Taking unilateral actions by bypassing the Security Council is dangerous and against the will of all member states , '' Jiang warned .
Meanwhile , the Chinese president called for greater role of the U.N. in promoting common development of mankind , one of the purposes for founding the organization , and the promotion of the democratic decision-making system in the world body .
`` With such a large membership of 189 , the U.N. is in the best position to discuss and address this issue that developing countries are faced with and it should give it top priority , '' Jiang emphasized .
Jiang said that all the U.N. members , irrespective of their size , strength and wealth , should be treated as equals .
`` The reform of the U.N. should reflect fully the common will of its member states , '' Jiang went on to say .
`` Particular and adequate attention should be given to the reasonable demands and fundamental interests of the vast majority of developing countries .
''
