QUITO , Ecuador --
A leftist member of Congress here is assassinated just a few yards from the Capitol building , and Colombians with ties to that country 's right-wing death squads are arrested for the crime .
A wealthy Venezuelan businessman is kidnapped in Caracas and ends up in the hands a left-wing Colombian guerrillas .
For more than three decades , Colombia has endured a conflict in which both sides regard civilians as targets .
But the scope of the strife seems to be widening .
`` This is clearly becoming a major and much wider regional problem , spilling over Colombia 's borders , '' said Michael Shifter , a senior fellow at the policy analysis group Inter - American Dialogue in Washington .
`` As the Colombian situation deteriorates and it becomes clear that it cannot be resolved simply by the Colombians , that may bring neighboring countries together to work out a coordinated , sustained response . ''
Since at least 1996 , units of the Peasant Self - Defense Forces , Colombia 's main right-wing paramilitary group have made forays into Panama , attacking villages and killing civilians in the remote Darien province , But the assassination of Jaime Hurtado , a leader of an Ecuadorean Marxist - Leninist party called the Popular Democratic Movement , on a busy downtown street here Feb. 17 marked a new level of violence .
Hurtado , a native of Esmeraldas , a port town that has long been a center of contraband trade with Colombia , was gunned down with two associates as he left Congress .
Several Colombians living here were quickly arrested .
In an interview this month with the Bogota newspaper El Tiempo , Carlos Castano , the main paramilitary leader , stopped short of taking responsibility for Hurtado 's death .
He attributed the killing to `` an international military support front '' sympathetic to his group , and said it was justified because Hurtado was `` the biggest supplier of arms '' to the main guerrilla group , the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia .
In the interview , Castano threatened to extend the conflict into Venezuela , Colombia 's eastern neighbor and traditional rival .
He accused Venezuela 's new populist president , Hugo Chavez , of `` throwing open his arms to the guerrillas '' since taking office in February , and said that while it was acceptable for Chavez to offer Venezuelan territory as a site for peace talks , `` he cannot convert his country into a refuge for guerrillas . ''
Chavez `` is going to have a problem , because we are going to apply hot pursuit there , and there are going to be confrontations , '' Castano warned .
`` If in Caracas they are going to offer refuge to the big chiefs so they can plan their violent offensives against our country from over there , then our self-defense will extend to Caracas . ''
Within hours , the Venezuelan government responded emphatically : If Castano 's forces try to cross the border , they will be `` taught a lesson , '' said Interior Minister Luis Miquilena warned .
For their part , left-wing guerrillas also seem to have expanded their theater of action .
In a case that shocked Venezuelans , a prominent Caracas businessman was recently kidnapped by local criminals and `` sold '' to Colombia 's second-largest guerrilla group , the National Liberation Army , which returned him to his family after being paid a ransom of several million dollars .
Chavez , a former army paratrooper who led a violent , unsuccessful coup attempt in 1992 , has declared himself neutral in the Colombian conflict .
But Colombian President Andres Pastrana canceled a meeting with Chavez on their border two weeks ago after Chavez suggested that the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia now controlled enough territory to be formally recognized as a `` belligerent '' force under international law .
When Chavez was elected in December , the Revolutionary Armed Forces welcomed him , calling the vote `` a victory for the people '' over a corrupt `` party machine . ''
In an interview with Reuters at that time , Joaquin Gomez , a senior guerrilla commander , described Chavez 's rise to power as `` a moral stimulus to all those patriotic soldiers in both Colombia and the rest of Latin America . ''
Since then , Chavez has provided a safe haven for the National Liberation Army 's No. 2 leader , Antonio Garcia , in Maracaibo .
It is not known if the guerrilla group agreed to cease its operations in Venezuela in return for asylum , but rebel leaders did hold two rounds of inconclusive peace talks with Colombian officials in Caracas in February .
The deepening tensions have also contributed to a worsening of relations between Colombia and Peru .
In a speech to the Inter - American Defense College in Washington in February , President Alberto Fujimori of Peru reproached his Colombian counterpart for beginning peace talks with the rebels , saying he `` finds the dialogue to be incomprehensible . ''
`` We are observing with deep concern the growth of the old and illegal armed groups in the neighboring sister republic of Colombia , '' Fujimori told his audience , United States and Latin American military and civilian officials .
`` This alarming situation worries us because it can cease to be a national problem and become a threat to regional security . ''
In the speech , later criticized by Colombian officials , Fujimori noted : `` There is also a well-known ideological and practical link between the Colombian guerrillas and Peruvian terrorist organizations .
It is a reality that these groups violate the sovereignty of neighboring countries and encourage the internationalization of the armed struggle . ''
Military officials say Fujimori recently sent troops to the border .
For their part , Brazil and Colombia have been trying to negotiate a border cooperation agreement , and are to meet next month to discuss problems along their remote and lightly defended frontier .
A Brazilian official involved in the talks said his government is concerned about `` guaranteeing our territory '' against incursions by guerrillas and drug traffickers , who are often one and the same .
To Hurtado 's surviving associates here , all of these recent developments suggest that his assassination was , in the words of Ciro Guzman , the party 's national director , `` a crime of state . ''
Both Ecuadorean and U.S. officials have denied any role in the killing , but Guzman maintains that strategic interests lie behind the assassination .
`` They want to justify the formation of a multinational army of Ecuadorean , Peruvian and Brazilian forces to fight a regional war in support of the Colombian army , '' Guzman said .
`` Such an army would have the full backing of the United States , but it would pulverize the Colombian people and convert Colombia into a new Vietnam . ''
