SAN SALVADOR --
Two years of democratic presidential politics have accomplished what $ 5 billion worth of anticommunist US aid in the 1980s could not : Divide El Salvador 's largest leftist opposition group .
In 12 years of civil war against a US -backed conservative government , the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front gathered former soldiers , peasants , doctors , and teachers with a unifying mission : to replace the country 's ruling elite .
But almost seven years after both sides put down their guns , a fractured front faces elections Sunday .
And if preelection opinion polls are correct , the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front candidate , Facundo Guardado , a former guerrilla commander , will run a distant second to Francisco Flores of the ruling National Republican Alliance , some of whose founders had ties to right-wing death squads that had been linked to tens of thousands of wartime killings .
Such an electoral loss would mark a dramatic and disappointing skid for the front , known as FMLN , which a decade ago swelled with support from college campuses in New England and other socialist leaders in Cuba and Nicaragua .
`` This party is trying to change , and it 's redefining itself , '' said Hector Silva , a Cambridge native who is now the FMLN mayor of this capital city .
`` We were the broad opposition during the war .
Now the question is , where do we stand on more pragmatic issues ? ''
Two years ago , the front seemed to be near the presidency .
It had taken over mayoralties in most of El Salvador 's largest cities and won nearly a dozen seats in congress , taking away the National Republican Alliance majority .
But internal divisions , which sources say had been percolating since war 's end , became more public , and began to chip away at the front .
Hard -line members , most of them former guerrillas who believed in broad Marxist principles , resisted the ideas of a growing moderate wing whose members expressed concerns over more pragmatic issues such as tax policy and public safety .
The debates spilled into the selection process for the party 's presidential candidate .
The moderates supported Silva , 50 , a US -educated obstetrician and former assembly member .
Although he did not fight in the war , Silva has become a popular figure for tackling several quality-of-life issues , such as San Salvador 's worsening pollution .
But at a party convention last year , more militant members won a ticket with two former combatants , Guardado and Nidia Diaz .
`` This is a country of amazingly practical people , '' one diplomatic source said last week .
`` My guess is that if the FMLN had picked Silva , they would be doing much better . ''
Roughly half of the voters in this tiny Central American country are expected to cast their ballots Sunday , among them Leonor Marquez .
The 25-year -old former guerrilla now collects tickets at the Museo de la Revolucion , a museum dedicated to the country 's revolutionary movements .
Even she has doubts .
`` I guess you could say that things have changed since the war , '' Marquez said .
`` We used to be much more united , but now I do n't even know who I 'm going to vote for . ''
The National Republican Alliance , whose initials in Spanish are ARENA , has also experienced problems in its transformation from wartime government machine to peaceful party .
But experts credit it with presenting a more united image .
Unlike the party 's last two elected presidents , Alfredo Cristiani and Armando Calderon Sol , who were conservative businessmen and part of ARENA 's traditional anticommunist wing , Flores has portrayed himself as a more centrist and more distant candidate .
He has refused to debate his opponents .
In the early 1980s , he spent several years studying mystical philosophies , sometimes visiting gurus in India , according to a recent biography published by the San Salvador daily , El Diario de Hoy .
A devout Catholic , Flores also took a graduate course in liberation theology at Harvard University .
`` He seemed like a very serious student and he had a deep interest in economic justice , '' said Harvey Cox , the professor who taught the course , who has periodically spoken to his former student .
A virtual unknown as an assemblyman , Flores shocked party members when he announced his candidacy last spring , months before other parties had decided on nominees .
Despite initial criticism from party leaders , however , ARENA has firmly supported its candidate .
`` Like everyone else , ARENA has had to change its methods , '' Calderon Sol said in an interview on Friday .
`` This has been a more transparent campaign and less confrontational . ''
The challenge for the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front , Silva said , is to `` construct a new model '' as a political party rather than a military group .
`` The democracy and human rights that we fought for during the civil war have been pretty much achieved , '' he added .
`` Now we 're learning how to govern without forgetting that we still want to have better distribution of economic growth . ''
The FMLN 's problems are not unique in this region , which for most of the 1980s was immersed in bloody battles between leftist insurgents and rightist governments .
The Sandinistas in Nicaragua have had difficulty building political support after losing the presidency in 1990 .
If no candidate wins 50 percent of Sunday 's vote , a runoff would be held within the next few weeks .
Those who support a return to a more traditional FMLN platform say the answer is not in becoming a more centrist organization , but in bringing back the populist platform and fiery rhetoric that inspired the movement in its heyday a decade ago .
`` It 's as if when we put away our guns we put away our hearts , '' said Victor Martinez , an FMLN member from the small northern town of San Francisco de Gotera .
`` So far , this has been a very boring campaign .
