SAN SALVADOR --
With the kind of relaxed order that residents here could only pray for a decade ago , more than 1 million voters peacefully cast presidential ballots Sunday , a good-news development for President Clinton ahead of his regional visit .
`` We 're not afraid anymore , '' said Nicolas Guevera , a 53-year -old bricklayer from Mejicanos , a northern suburb of the capital .
`` This is not like before , when we were scared of being hit by gunfire . ''
For many residents , the calm of Sunday 's balloting was another soothing reminder of how far their country has come since a 12-year civil war between leftist rebels and the US -backed rightist government turned their neighborhoods into battlegrounds and made voting a frightful civic duty .
Yet while emerging democracy in El Salvador will probably become a prominent backdrop for Clinton , who begins a four-day visit to the region Monday , leaders and residents also warn of a growing pessimism over their economic troubles .
US and Central American officials have warned of a new stream of refugees from the ruins of Hurricane Mitch , which devastated the region last October .
Outgoing President Armando Calderon Sol said he would urge Clinton to open US markets to more Salvadoran goods and would propose the development of more liberal trade agreements with Central America .
`` We 're ready to be partners in commerce , '' Calderon Sol said from his presidential office .
`` We 're trying to make the transition from Cold War to democracy , but we ca n't if we do n't have economic stability . ''
Yet Clinton is coming empty-handed .
He had hoped to announce nearly $ 1 billion in aid for the region , but Congress last week coupled the aid to domestic spending cuts that Clinton rejected .
Some of the economic frustration felt in El Salvador could be noted in Sunday 's low voter turnout .
Less than half of the country 's 3 million registered voters bothered to cast ballots , others evidently seeing little prospect of change .
Even many who did vote said they were troubled that nearly seven years of peace have done little to improve their standard of living .
`` I see so much poverty wherever I go and it really affects the way I feel , '' said Cesar Ortez , 22 , who makes $ 229 a month working in a clothing factory .
`` The war may be over , but it feels like we 're still fighting for our own survival . ''
Ortez voted for Ruben Zamora , a candidate from the Center Democratic Union , a center-left party .
Ortez 's wife , Ana Gonzalez , voted for the leftist Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front , the former guerrilla group known as the FMLN .
`` Even though our candidate is not great , I still believe in the principles of the front , '' said Gonzalez , a college student , referring to Facundo Guardado , a former FMLN commander .
An early exit poll released Sunday night by the University of Central America showed that Guardado had 33 percent of the vote , while Francisco Flores , the candidate from the ruling National Republican Alliance , or ARENA , had 43 percent .
Zamora had 14 percent .
Flores declared victory Sunday night , but it remained unclear whether he would get the majority needed to avoid a runoff election in April .
Flores , 39 , a graduate of the University of Massachusetts at Amherst and former Parliament speaker , has tried to soften ARENA 's once fervent anticommunist image .
He surprised the country 's political establishment when he announced his candidacy last spring several weeks before anyone else .
`` We 're very pleased with the orderly manner that Salvadorans have voted Monday , '' Flores told reporters after casting his ballot at a San Salvador school .
`` Monday is a victory for our country . ''
Guardado , 44 , has tried to emphasize the growing crime problems in the country 's cities , but has been hurt by divisions within the FMLN between traditional socialists and more pragmatic moderates .
There were few polling irregularities reported .
Most polls opened at 7 a.m. and closed promptly at 5 p.m. local time .
A few precincts , however , opened a few minutes late .
At the Feria Internacional exhibition center in San Salvador , the nation 's largest precinct , thousands of voters turned the pale gray and white structure into a street fair .
Families and friends milled and chatted while dozens of vendors sold everything from fruit drinks to home-made popsicles .
Traffic was jammed along Avenida de la Revolucion in front of the center .
Another explanation for the low turnout Sunday may be in El Salvador 's often confusing voting rules .
To be eligible to vote , residents must acquire a voting card that requires an applicant to move through a maze of bureaucracy .
On election day , voters must report to polling places designated by the first lettter of their last name , rather than casting ballots at a neighborhood precinct .
`` I wish they would make this easier , '' said Francisco Rene Alvarez , whose two-hour journey to the polls required rides on two buses .
`` If they let us vote where we live , more people would want to vote .
But maybe they do n't want more votes . ''
Although the government recently passed electoral reforms that call for residential voting , observers say the government has been slow to implement those changes .
Clinton -- touring the region without Hillary Rodham Clinton , who has been sidelined with a recurring back problem -- is likely to promote democratic movements in El Salvador , Nicaragua , Honduras , and Guatemala as a legacy of the controversial US policies in the region in the 1980s .
But leaders of those countries are also expected to ask for more money to ensure that democratic reforms will continue , particularly after the hurricane-related destruction of much of the region 's agricultural -based economies .
Calderon Sol said the region 's economic troubles have also sent a new wave of immigrants north to the United States in search of jobs and money to send home .
`` Ultimately , it 's not about our people going to the US , but about our people being able to work here , '' he said .
`` We 're not interested in gifts , but in investment . ''
Hurting Clinton 's efforts will be the end Monday of a hurricane-related US moratorium in deportations of illegal immigrants back to El Salvador and Guatemala .
White House officials say there is `` no basis '' for extending the deportation stay .
But Foreign Minister Eduardo Stein Barillas of Guatemala warned that the forced return of a large number of immigrants would severely crimp recovery efforts .
