NEW YORK --
Hillary Rodham Clinton and Rudolph Giuliani find themselves confronting a series of decisions in their U.S. Senate campaigns over the next two months that might be as important as any they make between now and Election Day : how to pick their way through a maze of six independent parties listed on the New York state ballot , each clamoring for a role in a contest in which third-party endorsements could make a crucial difference .
For years , the small-party dynamic in New York amounted to the Liberal Party backing the Democratic candidate and the Conservatives cross-endorsing the Republican .
But Giuliani 's alliance with the Liberal Party during his three mayoral campaigns has rewritten the way that third-party politics are played .
What is more , three more independent parties have joined the ballot this year .
Along with the long-existing Liberals , Conservatives and the Right to Life Party , they are maneuvering to play an influential role in the contest by either endorsing Clinton or Giuliani , or running candidates of their own .
The result of these competing forces is a political landscape of unusual complexity .
It has left aides to Giuliani and Clinton struggling with forces that could very well determine the outcome , yet are largely beyond their control .
As of Wednesday , both Clinton and Giuliani seem inclined to seek the support of the Liberal Party and , perhaps , the more problematic Independence Party , which is the New York incarnation of Ross Perot 's division-wracked Reform Party .
But leaders of the Right to Life and Conservative parties said Wednesday they were likely to run their own candidate in November , which appeared to be unwelcome news for Giuliani , given that Republican candidates have needed their support to win statewide .
-LRB- BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- The questions of what the minor parties will do and how the major party candidates would deal with them have become more pressing with the approach of a June 6 deadline for naming their candidates .
`` We 're reaching out to a number of the smaller parties , '' said Bill de Blasio , the manager of Clinton 's campaign , echoing an interest expressed by Giuliani 's advisers .
`` We think they will play an important role in this race . ''
Michael Long , the chairman of the state Conservative Party , said the third parties ' role would ultimately be very significant .
`` If you look at the polls , '' he said , `` 51 percent of the people say they do n't want either of these candidates .
I believe the minor parties are going to have an awful lot to say . ''
The maneuvering comes amidst what is , in fact , much debate about the actual value of third-party endorsement , as well as concern about the cost of being aligned with parties that often take positions outside the mainstream of political thought .
-LRB- END OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- As a matter of mathematics , aides to Giuliani and Clinton are wary of candidates who could drain support away .
What is more , advisers to both major candidates are looking for any advantage , no matter how slight , that might come with having their candidate 's name appear on an extra line .
That said , the parties that Giuliani and Clinton choose in the months ahead could help shape voters ' ideological views of them , or allow their opponents to portray them as extremists .
Clinton accepted the support over the weekend of the Working Families Party , a liberal-leaning party organized by labor and community activists .
The ballot line-up has become a subject of increasing interest in recent days .
Leaders of the Conservative Party and the Right to Life Party spent an afternoon last week interviewing Joseph L. DioGuardia , a former Republican Party member of Congress , from Westchester County , about running as the candidate of both parties .
DioGuardia said in an interview later that he might be interested in making the race .
Ray B. Harding , the head of the state Liberal Party , said Wednesday that he would soon convene his policy committee to interview any candidates interested in his party 's endorsement .
Harding is apparently focusing only on Giuliani , his old friend , and Clinton : he has told associates that he would not leave his party 's ballot line blank or run a minor candidate to siphon votes away from Clinton as a way of helping Giuliani .
And just in case things were not complicated enough , Kathleen Healey , the chairwoman of the Green Party , said Wednesday that Al Lewis , an actor who appeared in `` The Munsters '' television show in the 1960s , who received 52,500 votes when he ran for governor in 1998 , might run for the Senate .
That could be an irritant to Clinton , because the Green Party 's presidential candidate is expected to be Ralph Nader , and the party seems likely to take votes away from the Democrats .
If Giuliani ends up winning the Liberal Party endorsement , he would share a line with Al Gore , the Democratic candidate for president , a cause of some discomfort for both Gore and Mrs. Clinton .
The Independence Party would seem , on the face of it , to be highly attractive , given the fact that it drew 364,000 votes in 1998 .
However , if Clinton or Giuliani got the party 's support , they might find themselves sharing a line with Patrick J. Buchanan , who is running for president .
For Giuliani in particular , who is trying to present himself as a moderate , Buchanan might be one person to avoid .
The area most in flux , however , involves the Liberal and Conservative parties .
A Liberal Party endorsement of Giuliani could be particularly valuable in this race , since it might make it easier for him to draw more Democratic votes from Clinton if they are able to vote for him on the Liberal rather than the Republican line , which is why Giuliani is likely to seek it .
Long , the Conservative Party leader , has said he would not support Giuliani if he ran on the Liberal Party line .
But the Conservative Party drew 348,000 votes in 1998 , and some of Giuliani 's associates said , given the size of that bloc , that they might go around Long and appeal to the party 's rank and file at the convention .
