ANKARA , January 9 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The killing of one of Turkey 's leading industrialists indicated that Turkey entered `` a painful period of chaos , '' said the chairman of the Democratic Left Party -LRB- DSP -RRB- .
Bulent Ecevit made the remarks at the DSP parliament group meeting today following the killing of Ozdemir Sabanci , chief executive of Toyota - Sa , a joint venture between the powerful Sabanci Holding and Japan 's Toyota .
Ecevit said the increasing terrorist attacks in all the provinces , the recent prison riots and the killing of Sabanci today indicated that Turkey had entered `` a painful period of chaos . ''
Meanwhile , the cabinet held an emergency meeting this afternoon on the assassination of Sabanci and promised to take the responsible to justice .
Ozdemir Sabanci , 54 , the youngest of Sabanci 's five-brother family , was killed along two of his aides by leftist gunmen around 11 : 00 a.m. local time -LRB- 09 : 00 GMT -RRB- today in his office in the 28-storey twin tower of Sabanci center , in downtown Istanbul .
Istanbul police sealed of the building immediately until late afternoon but no suspects were found inside .
Local television reported that the killing was reported to police only 45 minutes after the attack on the 25th floor .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Two people , including a woman , were reportedly involved in the attack , and the Revolutionary People 's Liberation Party/Front -LRB- DHKP/C -RRB- has claimed responsibility for the assassination .
A man , who said he was a member of the organization , called local press offices , saying they would continue to `` take revenge on blood that is spilled by facism . ''</ENAMEX>
Necdet Menzir , former Istanbul police chief , told Show tv this evening that the killing was `` professionally '' planned and conducted , since the Sabanci center was believed to be heavily protected by security units and advanced monitor system .
The DHKP/C organization is regarded as one of the leading extremist groups in Turkey , which has increased its violent activities in 1995 .
Police say the grs to textiles and banking .
