COLOMBO , September 5 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- A total of 29 political parties and 99 independent groups have handed in nomination papers of 5,048 candidates contesting the October 10 general elections , the Elections Department said in a statement on Tuesday .
This is the highest number of candidates contesting a general election in Sri Lanka .
The last general election in 1994 saw only 1,449 candidates trying to win over voters .
The statement said that of the total number of candidates 3,883 represent 29 political parties while the rest will contest as independent groups .
On Monday alone a total of 417 nomination lists were submitted to contest the 22 electoral districts .
The nominations started on August 28 and concluded by noon on September 4 .
The largest number of candidates are to contest in the Colombo , Kurunegala , Trincomalee and Wanni districts .
Only four political parties -- the main opposition United National Party -LRB- UNP -RRB- , the leftist JVP or Peoples ' Revolutionary Front , Puravesi Peramuna -LRB- Citizen 's Front -RRB- and the Sinhala Urumaya -LRB- Heritage -RRB- -- will fight in all the 22 electoral districts .
The ruling Peoples ' Alliance has handed in nominations for all the electoral districts except Jaffna .
The most number of independent candidates are for the Nuwara Eliya district .
The largest number of candidates , or 575 in all , are for the Colombo district from 20 political parties and five independent groups .
Some 12 million voters will go to the polls on October 10 to elect their representatives according to the proportional representation system .
Political parties on the national list will appoint 29 legislators who will not contest any electorate .
All contesting political parties and independent groups also handed over their national lists with each containing 29 names .
Although police have strengthened security in the run-up to the polls , 32 incidents of election-related violence have been reported so far since the dissolution of the parliament on August 18 .
In the eastern Digamadulla electoral district two UNP supporters were gunned down in eastern Sri Lanka on Monday and several others were wounded hours after formal campaigning began for the elections .
