COLOMBO , September 3 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Election fever is gripping Sri Lanka 's war-torn Jaffna as 18 political parties and four independent groups have handed in their nominations to vie for the nine lawmakers ' seat for the electoral district in the October 10 general elections , election officers said Sunday .
Nominations for the northern Jaffna district were accepted as a military operation continued in the peninsula since Thursday with troops extensively using MIG -27 bombers and multi-barrel rocket launchers against the separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam -LRB- LTTE -RRB- .
The ruling People 's Alliance is running in Jaffna as an independent group while the main opposition United National Party is running under its own banner .
The other mainstream southern parties include the JVP or People 's Liberation Front , Sinhala Urumaya -LRB- Heritage -RRB- and the New Left Front .
The entry of Sinhala Urumaya in the poll fray is interesting as the party advocated a military solution to end the conflict with the LTTE and is firmly opposed to any political solution based on granting administrative autonomy to the north and the east where minority Tamils inhabit in large numbers .
The Tamil parties in the fray include Eelam People 's Democratic Party -LRB- EPDP -RRB- , Eelam People 's Revolutionary Liberation Front -LRB- EPRLF -RRB- , People 's Liberation Organization of Tamil Eelam -LRB- PLOTE -RRB- , Tamil Eelam Liberation Organization -LRB- TELO -RRB- and the Tamil United Liberation Front -LRB- TULF -RRB- .
The position taken by the banned LTTE is not clear as yet .
It is believed that they will support independent groups who will follow their line .
The LTTE , fighting a 17-year war for a separate Tamil state in Sri Lanka 's north and east , has not allowed even the democratically elected municipal councils to function smoothly in Jaffna .
They have gunned down two elected mayors belonging to the moderate TULF before .
The commissioner of elections is to decide soon with the security forces how the campaigning will be done in troubled Jaffna as the nominations for the election will conclude by noon next Monday .
