LOS ANGELES
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Democratic presidential candidate Bill Bradley said Thursday that the legislative amendment passed by the House allowing the posting of the Ten Commandments in schools may be unconstitutional .
Presidential candidates had a broad range of reaction to the Ten Commandment amendment to gun control legislation .
The amendment passed the House by a 248-180 vote .
`` It will have to be tested in the courts , '' said Bradley said of the amendment .
`` My hunch is it 's unlikely to pass constitutional muster . ''
Vice President Gore , Democratic front-runner , said : `` It 's a lot easier to childproof a gun than to bulletproof a child . ''
Texas Gov. George W. Bush , the GOP front-runner , said states and localities should have the authority to make their own decisions about their own schools , said spokeswoman Mindy Tucker .
GOP presidential candidate , Gary Bauer took partial credit for the measure , saying the amendment is `` a bill I helped draft . ''
`` I believe if more American children read the Ten Commandments and are taught what they mean , they will predictably engage in less crime , '' he said , noting the sentiment for religion in the schools after the recent student massacre in Colorado .
`` I went to Littleton , Colo. , '' Bauer said .
`` What you see are little handmade signs everywhere , ` Let our children pray , ' and ` Bring religion back in to our schools . '
I think there 's something stirring out there . ''
Another GOP candidate , Steve Forbes , called the House 's approval of displaying the Ten Commandments `` a positive thing .
The Ten Commandments , we need to understand and adhere to .
The more we see them , the better off we 'll be . ''
Bradley was in Los Angeles to lay out his agenda on guns , which included a call for a ban on `` junk '' handguns , the inexpensive , cheaply made weapons most often linked to crime .
`` These can explode in a user 's hand , '' the former three-term senator from New Jersey said while holding up a Lorcin .380 semiautomatic gun .
`` They are dangerous . ''
Bradley called the gun one of the 10 most often used in crimes and said that in Los Angeles alone there are 45 varieties of such guns .
He quoted numbers from the Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco and Firearms that show 81 percent of the guns it links to crimes can be called junk guns .
The stance seemed a slight retreat from reports last month that Bradley was considering pushing a ban on the sale of all handguns .
His aides say the ban on all handgun sales is a long-range goal , but they were announcing measures that could be pursued immediately .
Bradley , who is challenging Gore for the Democratic presidential nomination , said Thursday that he would support a ban on both the possession and sale of junk guns , also known as Saturday night specials .
Bradley also proposed a one-per-month limit on handgun purchases , banning anyone convicted of domestic violence from owning a gun , restricting firearms dealers to commercial areas , bumping up the cost of licenses for gun dealers , requiring a registration process for handguns similar to auto registration , and requiring background checks on buyers at gun shows .
Background checks are one of several issues in an expected Congressional showdown over a juvenile crime bill .
Gun control advocates back a proposal by Rep. Carolyn McCarthy , D - New York , saying that a background check may take up to three business days while some have argued for shorter waiting periods .
Bradley supports the checks but gave no specifics on a waiting period , choosing instead to focus on the junk guns .
Bradley also said he wants to require trigger locks for all handguns , a measure some gun manufacturers have already taken up voluntarily .
