WASHINGTON --
In a sign that the assault on the gun industry is gaining political momentum , mayors from around the country announced Thursday that they were helping prepare federal legislation to slow the circulation of handguns and were urging additional cities to sue manufacturers and dealers .
Mayor Edward G. Rendell of Philadelphia , head of a U.S. Conference of Mayors task force on gun violence , said he had been working with several members of Congress on a measure that would forbid anyone to buy more than one handgun a month , would crack down on unlicensed sales at gun shows and would give the Consumer Product Safety Commission the kind of authority over real guns that it has over toy guns .
In remarks to several hundred mayors at their annual winter meeting , Rendell said he had been persuaded to seek federal legislation after the failure of his own talks with manufacturers to solve gun-related problems in Philadelphia .
`` With them , '' he said , `` it all boils down to the same refrain : Guns do n't kill people .
People kill people . ''
Rendell long ago became the first big-city mayor to suggest that municipalities could recoup medical , law-enforcement and other costs stemming from gun violence by suing the manufacturers .
While Philadelphia has not yet sued , four other municipalities have : New Orleans and Chicago first , followed by Miami - Dade County and Bridgeport , Conn. , which filed their suits on Wednesday .
In general , the suits charge that the industry is liable either for failing to provide sufficient safety devices on its products or for stimulating an illicit trade by flooding given areas with more weapons than a legitimate , lawful market could ever accommodate .
On Thursday , the mayors who have already sued encouraged other cities to follow their lead .
`` All of us should consider filing lawsuits , '' said Mayor Alex Penelas of Miami - Dade County , whose suit , against 24 gun makers and 3 trade organizations , seeks unspecified damages .
Richard J. Feldman , executive director of the American Shooting Sports Council , a trade organization that represents many gun makers and is a defendant in the suits , said in a telephone interview that the mayors ' initiatives were largely misguided .
The mayors `` point fingers , '' Feldman said , because their own efforts at fighting crime have failed .
Specifically , he said the industry opposed purchase limits because they were no solution : if only one gun is sold , it can always get into the wrong hands in the absence of reasonable safeguards .
But he said the industry would support safety oversight , although not by the Consumer Product Safety Commission , which , he said , lacks expertise .
`` We would not be opposed to ATF having that authority , '' he said of the Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco and Firearms .
Rendell said the one-handgun-a-month purchase limit in the federal legislation he was proposing would dramatically reduce the number of guns that end up in the hands of criminals through so-called `` straw man '' purchases : In many places , buyers can purchase from licensed dealers any number of handguns , which are then often quickly resold illegally .
The measure would also close what the mayors call `` the gun-show loophole , '' by requiring gun sellers working at state fairs , at flea markets and in other temporary quarters to have a license .
Further , it would create federal safety oversight by an agency specifically charged with consumer protection .
`` It 's ludicrous , '' Rendell said , `` that the Consumer Product Safety Commission has authority over the Mattel toy company but not gun manufacturers . ''
Another provision of the legislation would make money available to develop palm-print , fingerprint or other identification technology allowing only the owner of a gun to fire it .
Rendell said several senators had expressed interest in co-sponsoring the legislation .
But he mentioned only Democrats , which suggested that the bill might not have bipartisan support .
Mayor Paul Helmke of Fort Wayne , Ind. , a Republican , conceded that Rendell 's initiative would be a hard sell to many Republican lawmakers , especially those from states with large numbers of gun owners .
`` All mayors want to end gun violence , '' Helmke said .
`` The question is , Can he support the Second Amendment '' -- on the right to bear arms -- `` and still find a way to make restrictions on small guns ? ''
