BOSTON -- With several pointed digs , Vice President Al Gore took on the Republican frontrunner for president Monday , as outlined his own plan for fighting crime , including photo licenses for every new handgun owner in America .
Standing outside Boston Police headquarters in Roxbury , Gore took aim at Texas Governor George W. Bush as he denounced hate crimes , opposed loosening concealed weapon laws and said that gun laws should be written for families , `` not for gun lobbyists and their apologists . ''
Though the vice president never mentioned Bush by name , aides to Gore encouraged the comparison .
`` We welcome everyone and anyone to make the comparison on where we stand and where they stand , '' said Chris Lehane , Gore 's spokesman .
`` If the holster fits , wear it . ''
Among other things , Gore proposed : a Constitutional amendment to protect the rights of crime victims ; beefing up the criminal justice system with more prosecutors , defenders and judges ; new technology for police to help them map and target high crime areas ; banning cheap , easily concealed handguns ; and requiring tougher penalties for gun-related crimes , including violent crimes committed in front of children .
Many of the topics and applause lines in Gore 's address found an easy correlation to action Bush has taken - or not taken - while serving as governor of Texas .
For example , during this year 's legislative session in Austin , a bill to require background checks on gun buyers at Texas gun shows died .
Bush says he supports such checks , but believes Congress should pass such a bill , and so he did n't push the issue in the state Legislature .
Bush also kept his distance from the legislative debate on hate-crimes legislation , which would have set higher penalties for crimes committed because of a victim 's gender , race or sexual orientation .
The Texas bill was named for James Byrd Jr. , the black Texas who was dragged to death behind a truck .
That bill also died .
Bush did n't lobby the issue hard , his spokesman said , because he regarded it as a vote of conscience .
But Gore said he views such a stance is unconscionable .
`` It astonishes me that , just two weeks after the terrible crimes of hate in Illinois and Indiana , some still deny that hate crimes merit stiffer punishment , '' Gore said .
`` When a killer on the rampage picks Jews , Blacks and Asian Americans as his victims , I do n't understand how some can still argue that hate crimes are no different than all other crimes . ''
Gore , still without naming his leading rival , also offered a note of contrast on two other Bush priorities : the Texas governor 's signing of legislation ending a 125-year prohibition on private citizens carrying concealed weapons and also a bill to limit cities ability to sue gun manufacturers .
`` Some want to enact new protections for gun manufacturers .
I want to pass new protections for families , '' Gore said .
`` Some want more concealed weapons - but they ca n't conceal the fact that they 're just doing the NRA 's bidding .
Some want to overturn local gun control laws .
I want to overturn the influence of the gun lobby . ''
Bush also opposes mandatory child safety locks on guns .
To that , Gore quoted the Newton -based Stop Handgun Violence billboard .
`` It 's a lot easier to child-proof a gun than it is to bullet-proof a child , '' said Gore .
`` I agree . ''
The Bush campaign , however , said Gore 's gun-licensing plan would not work , and complained that the administration has been lax in prosecuting gun-related offenses .
`` A government registration of law abiding citizens will not prevent criminals from committing crimes with guns , '' said Mindy Tucker , Bush 's spokeswoman .
`` Tougher penalties and instant background checks will .
Governor Bush has consistently supported instant background checks to keep guns out of the hands of cirminals and juveniles . ''
Tucker said the Clinton - Gore administration has refused to provide additional funding for Project Exile , which gives resources to federal prosecutors to help them make gun offenses a top priority .
She also said that the administration has failed to prosecute hundreds of violations of the Brady law , which requires a seven-day waiting period to purchase a gun .
Gore 's nine-page speech , delivered to a friendly crowd of supporters , is his fifth major policy address in recent months and it further distinguishes him from Bush and from his Democratic rival , former Senator Bill Bradley .
Both Bush and Bradley have remained intentionally vague about their agendas , preferring to hold off on taking too many specific positions .
But Bradley did put forth his own gun-control plan last month , including proposals for the registration of all handguns and a ban on the manufacture and sale of Saturday night specials .
He also called for a one-per-month limit on handgun sales .
A spokesman for Bradley , Tony Wyche , welcomed Gore to the gun-control debate .
`` We 're very happy the vice president has started to support our proposals on gun control , '' Wyche said .
`` We think he should have gone further to ban gun dealers from residential neighborhoods , and should have been more clear on gun registrations . ''
So far , Gore has laid out his thoughts on education in Iowa , faith -based organizations in Atlanta , cancer research in Philadelphia , and liveability issues in Washington , D.C. In the next two weeks , he is expected to delve into economic themes , talking about how to help those who have not benefited from the nation 's prosperity .
Gore lavished plaudits on Boston , calling the city 's crime fighting `` an inspiration , '' and heaped praise on Mayor Thomas M. Menino , Police Commissioner Paul Evans and the Reverend Eugene Rivers for their efforts to prevent crime before it happens .
`` Your success here is an inspiration : For 18 months here in Boston , not a single precious child was killed , '' said Gore .
`` Youth homicide is down by 75 percent .
So far , in all of 1999 , not a single parent has lost a child to handgun violence .
This summer could be the safest in Boston 's recent history .
I really applaud you . ''
