BOSTON --
The British may or may not be coming .
It all depends on whether the state of Massachusetts makes them childproof their muskets .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The British , in this case participants of what is expected to be the largest reenactment of the battles of Lexington and Concord scheduled for next year , are threatening to retreat unless a new state law requiring locks and licenses on their antique firearms is changed</ENAMEX> .
The 225th anniversary of the historic battles is expected to draw re-enacters from around the world and perhaps as many as 250,000 spectators .
But the plans are now in a state of suspended chaos , organizers say , as they cope with the tough new gun-control law .
Plans for a Patriots Day reenactment , April 19 , intended as a dress rehearsal for the 2000 event , are also in chaos , organizers say .
`` I think that it was no one 's intent that muskets and other sorts of weapons with primitive ignition systems that date from the last century or before were ever to be included in the present legislation , '' said Paul O'Shaughnessy of Newton , commanding officer of the British Army 's 10th Regiment of Foot and an organizer of the historic battle reenactments .
`` They simply did not extend the exemptions in the new part of the law , which inadvertently left us ... subject to some of the rather stringent parts of the law . ''
O'Shaughnessy said many foreign and out-of-state participants will decide not to join in the reenactments if they are subject to the law .
`` These muskets are national treasures , '' O'Shaughnessy said .
`` This is like putting a red nose on the Lincoln Monument so that no one bumps into it . ''
Monday , Senator Susan C. Fargo filed a bill that would revise last year 's Assault Weapons Ban , exempting historic muskets made before 1899 from trigger locks and storage requirements .
She is also seeking an executive ruling from the public safety secretary to exclude participants from other countries -- Canada and Britain , in this case -- from having to get temporary licenses through the State Police in order to participate in the fake battle .
But others say gun-control opponents are just trying to draw fire to the state 's new law by creating a controversy .
Representative Paul C. Casey , who helped write the law , said the flap is indicative of gun-control opponents ' `` propaganda '' used `` in an effort to stymie support '' for the Assault Weapons Ban .
`` The latest theory to hit the streets has the ` Modern Minutemen ' worked up about their ability to conduct historical reenactments , '' said Casey , a Winchester Democrat .
`` It 's just another falsehood . ''
Casey said it is untrue that the new law altered a standing exemption covering Revolutionary -type muskets and replicas .
But Fargo , on the advice of Senate counsel , disagreed .
She said that because the Assault Weapons Ban does not specifically exempt the historic firearms and replicas , they are subject to the childproofing locks and storage requirements .
The new law has already triggered a tangible change inside the Senate chamber .
Two historic muskets on display there , one from the battle of Lexington and Concord and the other the first gun seized from the British during the Revolutionary War , recently have been outfitted with trigger locks .
When the Gun Owners Action League , a group that fought the Assault Weapons Ban , pointed out that the firearms hanging in the chamber violated the law , Senate President Thomas F. Birmingham installed the protective devices to show how easy it is to comply .
A spokesperson for GOAL said the group supports Fargo 's bill .
Birmingham 's quick action , whether politically motivated or not , could have backfired , some on Beacon Hill say , because the gun lobby is using the retrofitted muskets as proof that all of these antique firearms must be made compliant .
The confusion is also having an impact on next month 's planned reenactment of the Boston Massacre at the Old State House , as well as the Patriot 's Day event in April and June 's Battle of Falmouth performance .
The history buffs who role play obviously do n't want to be arrested .
`` As far as this year 's event , people may be forced to ... make the decision not to go , '' O'Shaughnessy said .
`` The problem with 2000 is that this year is a dry run for that . ''
That is why Fargo is seeking to clarify all this in a hurry .
Her bill states that firearms manufactured in or before 1899 , or any replica , would be exempted under the Assault Weapons Ban .
But Tom Nolan , an aide to Casey , said the law is clear .
Those from other countries need a temporary license to carry the muskets , while those from other states do not need a temporary license , Nolan said .
And no , the muskets do n't need locks or safety cases , `` as long as they 're under the control of someone authorized to use them , '' he added .
`` I simply do n't agree with his reading on this , '' Fargo said .
`` We 've been working on this for weeks , if not months , to make sure the events of Patriots Day take place in Lexington and Lincoln and Concord this year and next year when there 's going to be a big battle reenactment .
There 's some concern . ''
She said that even if trigger locks are placed on the antique weapons , the primitive ignition systems would allow the muskets to be fired .
As for those muskets in the Senate chamber , Birmingham remarked at the time that the only way the weapons could be considered operable is if someone had gun powder at hand .
John Rosenthal , founder and chairman of Stop Handgun Violence , a lead advocate of the Assault Weapons Ban , said the law is not intended to stand in the way of historical reenactments .
`` Although I think it 's responsible gun ownership to lock all guns , '' said Rosenthal .
`` That includes muskets if you can find a lock to fit it . ''
