WASHINGTON --
As Democrats were claiming victory after the Senate approved gun-control legislation this week , some of those who led the fight for the bill waited only a few minutes to call for a reality check .
The measures passed by the Senate did little or nothing to affect the 60 million handguns already in circulation , these advocates said , and it is far from clear whether the political will exists for the ultimate aim of some gun-control proponents , the licensing and registration of firearms .
Despite all the talk about how school shootings have changed the atmosphere on gun control , Senator Edward M. Kennedy said the Senate measures -- such as requiring child safety locks on new handguns and background checks on all gun-show purchases -- should be considered a beginning , not an end .
Some Republicans come to the opposite conclusion .
Senate majority leader Trent Lott of Mississippi , for example , said the Senate action will awaken voters to what he considers the danger that Democrats want to license guns , which the National Rifle Association has been warning about for years .
So the big question is whether the Senate 's move on gun control will lead to even tougher restrictions .
In the coming weeks , the House probably will approve a similar bill , but is not expected to add stronger measures .
If groundbreaking provisions are to be enacted , a presidential candidate would have to make them a campaign centerpiece and win election in order to implement them .
Kennedy , who has been urging his Senate colleagues to adopt gun-control measures since his brother , President John F. Kennedy , was assassinated in 1963 , now hopes that Congress this year will tackle controversial proposals such as forbidding anyone under 21 years old from possessing a handgun .
If Republicans refuse , Kennedy said , `` I believe this will haunt them all the way to the 2000 election . ''
To be sure , Thursday 's 51-50 vote to require background checks on all gun-show sales , with Vice President Al Gore needed to break a tie , demonstrated how the atmosphere in Congress has changed toward some gun-control issues .
But the close vote also showed how difficult it would be to pass even stronger measures .
Even as Democrats were hailing the gun-show victory , they were quietly withdrawing an amendment that would have forbidden people under age 21 from possessing a handgun .
The measure , which Gore supports , probably would have been overwhelmingly rejected .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">The United States is one of a few major nations in the world that does not require federal licensing of handguns , according to the Coalition to Stop Gun Violence</ENAMEX> .
A<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL"> United Nations survey of 49 countries found only the United States and the Czech Republic do not have a firearm-licensing system</ENAMEX> .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">By comparison , the United Kingdom and Japan ban all or most handguns</ENAMEX> .
The UN study also showed that the death rate from handguns in the United States is 13.7 per 100,000 people , three times the average of other countries in the survey .
This has led gun-control advocates to say gun licensing would dramatically lower the death rate .
`` We do n't have any regulation of handguns in the United States .
For all intents and purposes , we do n't have gun control , '' said Mark Pertschuk , legislative director of the Coalition to Stop Gun Violence .
`` It is amazing to me when we have a shooting , people say , ` It 's the schools , teachers , the television . '
What 's needed is incredibly simple .
It 's the guns . ''
But Bill Powers , an NRA spokesman , said gun-control advocates are making the wrong comparison to other countries .
`` The US is the only country on Earth with the Bill of Rights , '' Powers said .
`` It is that document that separates us from other nations . ''
Powers was referring to the Second Amendment and the right to possess guns .
The amendment states : `` A well regulated Militia , being necessary to the security of a free State , the right of the people to keep and bear Arms , shall not be infringed . ''
To gun-control advocates , the licensing of guns would not prohibit people from possessing them .
While the NRA states that convicted felons should not be allowed to buy or possess handguns , the gun lobby says licensing is not the answer .
The solution , Powers said , would be for the Clinton administration to enforce existing laws that make it a federal crime for felons to buy guns .
`` The Bill of Rights is for law-abiding Americans , '' he said .
That argument resonates with many members of both parties , especially in states with strong hunting traditions .
For example , Senator Patrick Leahy , the Vermont Democrat , is not about to sign onto legislation that would require gun licensing , although he did vote for the gun-show measure this week .
During the Senate debate , Leahy wandered into the press gallery to make sure reporters realized which state has the fewest gun regulations .
`` We do n't have any gun laws , '' Leahy said proudly of Vermont , other than to regulate hunting seasons .
Scoffing at the argument that tougher gun laws would lead to lower crime rates , he said Vermont already has one of the lowest crime rates in the country .
Vermont is a unique state in many ways , but its gun tradition is mirrored around the country .
Leahy 's stance demonstrates how difficult it will be for Congress to go further than the Senate did this week .
Kennedy , however , sees reasons for optimism and concern , but he says he worries that Congress only seems to take action after a shooting tragedy .
