WASHINGTON --
The Senate made a bit of history last week , passing gun-control legislation that had been left for dead a week before .
The measures are modest , which may suggest that anti-gun-control forces remain powerful despite concern over shooting incidents at schools .
But the fact that they passed at all suggests that a center may be forming in a debate that has been dominated by two extremes .
The consensus seems to be behind measures to keep guns out of the hands of children and criminals without seriously restricting the ability of law-abiding adults to own firearms .
It could all fall apart when gun-control legislation goes before the House of Representatives , probably next month .
The war could then begin anew between those who want to go so far as to ban the sale of inexpensive handguns and require all guns to be registered with the police and those who believe Americans have the right to own and carry guns more or less at will .
But the vote for gun control in the Senate on Thursday , a month after the massacre in Littleton , Colo. , and the day of a frightening shooting in a high school in Conyers , Ga. , could mark a turning point -- a first small step toward a middle ground between the extremes on an extraordinarily divisive political topic .
Parallels can be found on other issues .
Consider , for instance , health care and abortion .
For two decades after World War II , one of the fiercest battles in American politics was fought between those who wanted a national health insurance system and those who thought any government role in health care would amount to socialized medicine .
The result was deadlock .
Then in 1965 , Medicare and Medicaid were established providing government insurance for the elderly , the disabled and the poor .
Those programs became almost instantly popular .
Health insurance has remained an issue in American politics .
But the question is no longer one of extremes -- whether the government should be in control or excluded -- but rather what the extent of the government involvement should be .
On abortion , politicians were caught for years between those who wanted to outlaw the practice and those who believed that women should have an unrestricted right to terminate their pregnancies .
In 1992 , the Supreme Court found a point in between .
The court reaffirmed Roe vs. Wade , its 1973 decision establishing a constitutional right to abortion , but the new ruling enabled states to impose restrictions like requiring minors to notify their parents before they had an abortion and imposing a waiting period between a pregnant woman 's first visit to a doctor for an abortion and the procedure itself .
Most Americans seem comfortable with this compromise , which appears to have taken the abortion debate out of the hands of the interest groups that had set its terms .
It defused abortion as a defining political issue so thoroughly that even Pat Robertson , the founder of the Christian Coalition , is now saying it is pointless to fight for a constitutional ban on abortion because it would never pass .
From the perspective of gun-control advocates , the measures approved last week by the Senate , with Vice President Al Gore casting the tie-breaking vote , are distinctly tame .
They would require background checks before firearms could be purchased at gun shows or reclaimed at pawn shops ; they would require childproof safety locks or storage boxes to be sold with all handguns , and they would restrict the access of children under 18 to semiautomatic weapons .
The Democratic sponsors of the legislation were careful to frame the issue as one of child safety .
They did not even try to restore a waiting period for handgun purchases , a provision of the 1994 Brady law that has since expired .
`` This debate has really been about common sense , moderate efforts to limit the accessibility and availability of weapons to children , '' said Sen. Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts .
Even many Republicans who opposed the bill -- as all but six of the 55 Republican senators did -- endorsed the principle of keeping guns from children .
`` We will do everything in our power to reduce the availability of guns to young people , '' said Sen. John McCain of Arizona , who voted against the bill but has made it clear in his campaign for the Republican presidential nomination that he is not averse to all restrictions on gun ownership .
McCain 's leading rivals for the nomination , Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Elizabeth Dole , have also indicated they can support some kinds of gun control .
Not all politicians and scholars on gun control agree that the Senate vote was a turning point .
That will not come until the politicians require guns to be licensed and gun owners to be trained , said James Q. Wilson , a retired professor of public policy at the University of California , Los Angeles , and a prominent expert on guns and crime .
`` I did n't see much in the Senate debate that would encourage me to think that 's in the offing , '' Wilson said .
Leading politicians here are still at odds .
After the vote , Sen. Trent Lott of Mississippi , the Republican leader , insisted that guns should not be blamed for shootings in schools .
`` Guns do n't cause people to do these things , '' Lott said .
`` When do we put the responsibility on the individuals ?
That 's who causes the problem . ''
Responding to that argument , Gore steered the issue back to keeping children out of trouble .
`` We used to have a problem with aspirin poisoning of children in our country , '' he said , `` and we appealed for better parenting and better parental controls of children , but not until there were childproof caps on the aspirins did the problem get significantly solved . ''
Outside Washington , the consensus behind keeping guns away from children may be even stronger than it is here .
Gov. Frank Keating of Oklahoma , a Republican who keeps a .38-caliber pistol in his night stand and who is an ardent opponent of restrictive gun control , said in a telephone interview , `` Even in a sportsman state like Oklahoma , people believe there are few if any circumstances when children should have unrestricted access to weapons . ''
Former Sen. Alan Simpson , R - Wyo. , who now views Washington politics from a distance as the director of the Institute of Politics at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard , said the Senate 's vote on gun control confirmed a favorite theory of his .
`` Extremists on both sides eventually become exposed , '' Simpson said .
`` People on the edges of the left and right then tumble down toward the middle .
This is what happened on abortion , on immigration , on the environment , on nuclear power .
And now it 's happening on guns . ''
