Editors : The following items from The N.Y. Times Week in Review for Sunday , Aug. 9 , will move Saturday in the ` a ' category .
MARKET - REVIEW -- The mystifying nature of that chicken-or-egg quandary is no longer solely a topic in ivory towers .
Down in the barnyard , the groundlings know that they are expected to play a big part in determining the future of the stock market .
And last week , on cue , individual investors reacted to the market 's swoon with predictable bleatings about buying opportunities and impending rebounds .
By Edward Wyatt .
MONICA - TV - REVIEW -- It has been a They - Shoot - Lawyers - Do n't -They ? marathon for viewers of the legal analysts who fog up the TV screens with talk about the Monica S. Lewinsky investigation .
By Jill Abramson .
LISTS - REVIEW -- Americans love lists , even bad ones , which serve mainly to start conversations about what is and is not on them .
By Judith H. Dobrzynski .
RWANDA - REVIEW -- For anyone setting out to write a history of recent strife in Central Africa , few opening lines could be more tempting these days than : In the beginning there was Rwanda .
By Howard W. French .
KASHMIR - REVIEW -- In an era when some of the world 's bitterest disputes have begun to give way to accommodation , the enmity between India and Pakistan over Kashmir erupted again over the past 10 days in ways that underscored how intractable and potentially dangerous the confrontation has become , especially since both countries have now demonstrated their ability to build and detonate nuclear weapons .
By John F. Burns .
IRAQ - REVIEW -- Once again , President Saddam Hussein of Iraq is thumbing his nose at the world community .
Last week , he said he is through cooperating with international weapons inspectors and wants the crippling economic sanctions on his country lifted .
The United Nations Security Council berated Iraq for its intransigence , and demanded that Baghdad change its decision .
By Eric Schmitt .
CASTRO - REVIEW -- The high point of Fidel Castro 's state visit to this 133-square-mile `` Spice Isle '' last week was the speech he delivered at Tanteen , a cricket field flanked by a simple grandstand and a stack of cargo containers .
As a couple of thousand people listened patiently , the Cuban leader lectured Grenadians for an hour and a half on the history of slavery in the West Indies and assorted other topics .
By Larry Rohter .
TERRORISM - REVIEW -- A terrorism scorecard .
By Philip Shenon .
ANGLICANS - REVIEW -- Before the world 's Anglican bishops wrapped up their once-a-decade gathering Saturday , they offered a glimpse of what Christianity may well look like in the next century from a global perspective .
By Gustav Niebuhr .
CAMPAIGN - REFORM - REVIEW -- Now that the federal budget is actually in balance , there is probably no subject on which Congress has legislated with more short-term success but less long-term impact than campaign finance .
By Adam Clymer .
THISWEEK - REVIEW -LRB- Undated -RRB- -- Some highlights of the week .
