If there is anything to be learned from the tragic shootings at Columbine High School last month , it 's the need for serious , genuine gun control .
However , given their conduct in the US Senate last week toward a very reasonable gun control measure , the Republicans apparently still have a lot of learning to do .
On Wednesday , the chamber approved an amendment by Idaho Republican Larry Craig , a member of the National Rifle Association 's board of directors , to make instant background checks of private sales at gun shows voluntary -- not mandatory .
On Thursday , the majority Republicans tried -- unsuccessfully -- to stop a measure aimed at prohibiting the import of high-capacity ammunition clips , which was not included in a 1994 assault weapons ban .
By Friday , and apparently worried about the political fallout of their earlier votes , senators pushed through a measure they said would indeed require background checks on buyers at gun shows , contrary to Wednesday 's vote .
But on closer examination , the bill was harshly criticized by President Clinton as full of `` high caliber loopholes '' and by some Democrats as a rather phony effort at real gun control legislation .
Democrats , who apparently know a weak gun control bill when they see one , pointed out that , under the measure , a gun sale would be automatically approved if the background check was not completed within 24 hours , instead of the three days under current law .
They also noted the bill would require no background check for a person who pawns a gun and then reclaims it .
Overall , the week 's votes on gun control show that GOP members still do n't get it , even as polls show strong public support for gun control , especially after the Colorado shootings .
Such votes lend credibility to Democrats and other gun control advocates who say much of the Republican Party is still under the influence , if not the outright control , of the NRA -- despite strong protests from Senate Judiciary Committee chairman Orrin Hatch of Utah that the NRA `` has n't had a thing to do with it . ''
It 's time for the Republican Party to `` get real '' with gun control .
Most Republicans and NRA members apparently see no connection between the need for tougher gun control laws and the number of children killed by guns .
Yet this country continues to lead the industrialized world in firearms-related deaths of children .
Our death rate is 12 times that of the next 25 nations combined , according to a study by the Centers for Disease Control .
As the study further points out , not all of that can be blamed on violence-prone youths .
In the past 10 years , more than 2,300 children 14 or younger have been shot and killed accidentally .
Overall , since 1960 more than 750,000 Americans of all ages have died of gunshot wounds .
Further , the United Nations found that of 1,107 children killed around the world by firearms in 1994 and 1995 , 86 percent died in the United States .
The number of adult deaths by firearms is also startling .
Consider a comparison with Japan , which had 93 firearm deaths in the same year that the United States registered 35,957 .
While a difference in population explains some of that disparity , it cannot mask for the fundamental truth : There is something very wrong in America .
Per capita , the US rate of firearms deaths is more than three times that of the next closest nation , Canada , according to the UN research .
Ernie Chavez , a University of Colorado specialist on violence , noted in a recent news article that , in one year alone , Los Angeles County had more murders than Canada .
He further noted in the Denver Post article , `` I 'd be hard-pressed to think of any country not in the midst of a revolution that has more violence and weaponry than us . ''
The latest estimates suggest that there are between 230 million and 250 million firearms in the United States .
It 's almost as if this country , with this proliferation , is at war with itself , and losing .
Worldwide reports suggest that most countries , after they face a tragedy such as the one at Columbine High School , immediately take action that results in stronger handgun control laws .
So far , the United States is not one of those .
As Mark Pertschuk , the Washington -based legislative director for the Coalition to Stop Gun Violence , said , there are two things that are true around the world but not here .
The first , he said , is that `` they have licensing and registration of firearms . ''
The second is `` they have radically lower levels of deaths . ''
There is no disputing that the second fact is the result of the first .
Other studies have determined that access to firearms is one of the reasons America 's rate of violent death is at epidemic proportions .
There is overwhelming evidence that tougher gun control laws would reduce the number of gunshot deaths in the United States .
Yet , there are still too many US lawmakers , including most GOP senators , who prefer to maintain their relationship with the NRA than to muster the courage to do the right thing -- support strong gun control laws that may save the lives of thousands of children in the coming years .
If these Republicans need a reason to justify their move to actual gun control laws , all they have to do is say , `` Let 's do it for the children . ''
It just may work .
-LRB- Robert A. Jordan is a Globe columnist . -RRB-
