Guns are making a killing in this country .
Gun and ammunition retail sales total about $ 9 billion annually .
Combined with accessories and gun-related services , the economic effect is somewhere between $ 20 billion and $ 25 billion .
Yet compared with most other consumer products , guns are virtually unregulated .
Guns are not under the auspices of the Consumer Product Safety Commission , which regulates the safety of virtually every other U.S. consumer product .
Guns were exempt from the commission when it was created in 1972 by Rep. John Dingell , who was a board member of the National Rifle Association .
Guns are not included in the Census Bureau 's economic census , which includes data from virtually all U.S. manufacturers , wholesalers and retailers in surveys taken every five years .
Although guns are lethal products , most adults can buy a gun in a retail store .
If a buyer is a felon , a convicted spouse or child abuser or a `` mental defective , '' he or she can buy a gun through a friend or relative .
Those are some of the findings in `` Making A Killing : The Business of Guns in America '' -LRB- The New Press , 258 pages , $ 25 -RRB- , a fascinating yet frightening look at the gun industry by Tom Diaz .
`` Congress has never subjected this lethal industry to the kind of scrutiny that it has the tobacco industry , the automobile industry , the airline industry , the funeral home industry , and the manufacturers and distributors of many other products that threaten the public health and safety , '' Diaz writes , calling firearms `` the last unregulated consumer product . ''
Diaz , a Georgetown University Law Center graduate , is a former journalist who specialized in intelligence and counterterrorism issues .
He is a policy analyst for a nonprofit public policy institute working to reduce gun violence .
Although the gun industry is shrouded in federally protected secrecy , Diaz uncovered a remarkable amount of data on the industry and on individual manufacturers .
A few giant manufacturers make most of the guns domestically , Diaz reports .
Of the 1.7 million pistols and revolvers made in 1995 , Smith & Wesson manufactured more than 500,000 .
Of the 1.2 million shotguns manufactured domestically , Remington Arms Co. made 426,442 .
All but one of the domestic manufacturers -- Sturm , Ruger & Co. -- are privately held , making it even more difficult to obtain information on their ownership , financial data or product data .
The gun picture becomes even murkier when Diaz looks at the large foreign gun importers .
As the demand for guns in the United States continues to rise and most other countries continue to restrict firearms , gun manufacturers abroad see this country as fertile soil for their products , Diaz writes .
Between 1978 and 1996 , about 20 million guns were imported for the U.S. civilian market , he writes .
In 1994 alone , 2.2 million guns were imported .
The foreign gun makers work under even less regulation and accountability , he adds .
`` It is interesting to note that most , if not all , of the foreign gun manufacturers who export to the United States cannot sell their products to civilians at home as freely as they can here , '' Diaz writes .
The top three gun manufacturers in Japan , for example , export 80 percent of their products to the United States .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">A Brazilian company sends virtually all its semiautomatic pistols to foreign markets such as the United States because Brazilian law forbids civilian ownership of such guns</ENAMEX> .
Diaz has scoured numerous sources , including the Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco and Firearms ; the gun media ; firearms industry associations ; and a host of others to pull together a picture of an industry as it is rarely seen .
He also tackles public policy issues , offering suggestions on how to take control of an industry cut free of basic health and safety features to which others are subject .
The book is frightening and enlightening .
-- BLURBS `` Global Investing : A Guide to the Best 50 Stocks in the World '' By Andrew Leckey Warner Books , $ 14.99 Many books tell you how to find great stocks .
This one actually names names .
Syndicated newspaper columnist Andrew Leckey picked his 26 foreign stocks and 24 U.S. stocks by analyzing their financial strength , value , expansion , competitiveness , consistency and performance , he writes .
He says that the stocks are diversified globally and that investors should buy and hold .
Coca - Cola , Fujitsu , General Electric and other major corporations are featured in his list .
-- `` The Complete Small - Business Sourcebook '' By Carl Hausman and Wilbur Cross TimesBooks , $ 27.50 Experience in starting a business can be `` expensive , inconvenient , and sometimes disastrous , '' write authors Carl Hausman and Wilbur Cross .
`` But learning from the experience of others is painless and profitable . ''
Providing access to experience , through a directory of information sources , is the goal behind this book .
The authors break up the small business experience into chapters and subsections on financing , hiring , etc. ; provide brief discussions on the topic ; and then list where to go for help .
The format is effective .
-- `` Quotable Business '' By Louis E. Boone Random House , $ 17.95 This wonderful selection provides more than 2,800 quotes that are `` funny , irreverent , and insightful '' messages about corporate life .
The second edition of this highly praised collection offers new chapters , including on women , relationship marketing and the Internet .
Other topics include management , motivation , customer service , marketing and ethics , to name a few .
The next time you need a quote , whether for personal inspiration or a speech , pick up this book .
-- -LRB- Teresa McUsic reviews business books for the Fort Worth Star - Telegram .
Visit the Star - Telegram 's online services on the World Wide Web : www.star-telegram.com -RRB-
