OTTAWA , Ontario --
News tends to travel in only one direction across the Canadian border , so most Americans have n't heard about the incident in which a trenchcoat-clad teen armed with a .22-caliber rifle walked into a Taber , Alberta , school the week after the Columbine murders , killing one student and wounding another .
The Taber shootings proved that similar acts of violence can occur on either side of the border .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">But for many Canadians , the contrast with the number of weapons employed and the carnage wreaked in Colorado also shows the dramatic impact of this nation 's much stricter gun laws</ENAMEX> .
`` Our children watch the same violent movies and television programs , they play the same violent video games , they also come from broken homes , and yet the rate at which our children kill other children is far less than in the United States , '' said Wendy Cukier , president of the Coalition for Gun Control , which has played a major role in the passage of several laws tightening the rules on gun ownership .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Canada already outlaws short-barreled `` Saturday night specials , '' imposes a 28-day waiting period on firearms purchases and places many more restrictions than the United States on who can own a gun .
Under a law passed in 1995 , every firearm owner in the country must be licensed by 2001 and all firearms must be registered by 2003</ENAMEX> .
The laws are not universally popular .
The tougher registration laws are currently being challenged before the Canadian Supreme Court , and opponents have questioned both the cost of implementing the new laws and some of the statistics cited by gun control advocates .
Peter Worthington , a columnist for the Toronto Sun , argues that Canadians are `` really not a gun-crazy people , '' in the first place , and that the new laws are `` almost a political fixation '' with the ruling Liberal Party .
But it 's clear that gun violence is far more rare here , and the balance of opinion is dramatically different from the United States , also .
According to Jean Valin of the Canadian Firearms Center , a federal agency , 82 percent of Canadians support the new laws , while gun owners are almost evenly split on the issue .
An incident like Columbine swayed Canadian public opinion in favor of the new laws passed during this decade : the massacre by an anti-feminist gunman of 14 women engineering students at the University of Montreal 's Ecole Polytechnique on Dec. 6 , 1989 .
Maclean 's magazine recently listed it as one of the 25 events that shaped Canada during this century .
`` Sometimes I think it takes an event of memorable horror and tragedy to galvanize and move a nation , '' said Alan Rock , who as justice minister guided passage of the 1995 legislation .
There is no anti-gun control organization in Canada as powerful as the National Rifle Association , nor is there an organization similar to the Coalition for Gun Control , which was co-founded by one of the survivors of the Ecole Polytechnique massacre .
It brought together a broad coalition , including police and public health agencies , church and victims ' groups and the Canadian Bar to support the changes .
Canada is different in other ways that enabled gun control advocates to carry the day , Cukier said : it has a parliamentary system , which makes it easier for the ruling party to pass legislation , and campaign spending limits , which make it harder to buy votes .
But she said since Columbine she is seeing evidence for the first time that the United States `` could do something , if you want to . ''
`` You need public support , institutional support -- and political will , '' Cukier said .
Tom Baxter writes for the Atlanta Journal - Constitution , Atlanta , Ga .
