WASHINGTON --
Declaring that the power of a million moms can defeat the gun lobby , California Sen. Dianne Feinstein introduced legislation Tuesday to require that gun owners obtain licenses and register their firearms .
Feinstein introduced her measure as thousands of women began traveling to Washington for a Mother 's Day rally on the National Mall in support of gun control .
Flanked by march organizers , Feinstein said the rally `` gives us the opportunity to bring together people around a measure that I think will be a pivotal one in the upcoming presidential campaign . ''
The Democratic senator 's legislation would impose requirements on gun owners similar to those that exist for drivers .
Owners of handguns , and semiautomatic firearms that use detachable magazines , would need licenses , which would cost $ 25 .
All sales of such weapons would be recorded and the information transmitted to the Treasury Department .
`` The time has come to say enough is enough and demand of Congress the passage of commonsense gun laws , '' Feinstein said in a Capitol Hill news conference .
sh1 Boxer Present Feinstein was joined by Sens .
Barbara Boxer , D - Calif. , and Frank Lautenberg , D - N.J. , and they stood before an oversized photograph of 10 children being led by police away from a Los Angeles day care center after a shooting there last summer .
`` In this country , when you want to hunt , you get a hunting license ; when you want to fish , you get a fishing license .
But when you want to buy a gun , no license is necessary , '' Feinstein said .
`` That makes no sense . ''
Feinstein chose to introduce the measure , nearly a year in the making , in the days before the `` Million Mom March '' as a way of galvanizing support and trying to apply pressure to the pro-gun forces in Congress .
Although the march is being sponsored by a nonpartisan group , its leaders stood with Feinstein at Tuesday 's news conference and said licensing and registration is their top priority .
Several far more modest gun control measures -- including legislation to require child safety locks , ban the sale of guns to minors , and extend a three-day background check to gun shows -- were passed by the Senate last year .
However , they were not approved by the House and are now languishing in a conference committee .
Feinstein acknowledged that her more sweeping measure has almost no chance to pass the current Congress , saying that the most powerful lobby in Washington is the gun lobby .
`` There is only one counter-lobby that can stand up to them , '' she said , `` and this is the women in America . ''
Feinstein said the political climate in Washington will change if Democrats prevail in November 's election .
Organizers of the Million Mom March hope to attract at least 100,000 -- and perhaps as many as 250,000 -- supporters to the National Mall on Sunday , and tens of thousands more at spin-off rallies in 67 other cities , including Oakland -LRB- the Oakland rally begins at 1 p.m. at the Lake Merritt bandstand -RRB- .
Adding to the confrontational atmosphere surrounding the issue , a Dallas -based group called the Second Amendment Sisters will hold a counter-march to draw attention to the lives that are saved by guns every year .
Organizers said they `` want to show the American public that not all women are pro-gun control . ''
The two marches will be on opposite sides of the Washington Monument .
The Million Mom March will go east from the monument to the Capitol , while the Armed Informed Mothers ' March will go west toward the Lincoln Memorial .
Texas state Rep. Suzanna Gratia - Hupp will be the keynote speaker at the pro-gun march .
Gratia - Hupp was in a restaurant in Killeen , Texas , in 1991 when a lone gunman killed 21 people in a shooting spree , including her parents .
She said she believes she could have saved lives , had she been armed , by shooting the gunman .
Only two politicians will speak at the gun control rally : Carolyn McCarthy , a New York Democrat whose husband was killed by a gunman on a Long Island commuter train , and Maryland Lt. Gov. Kathleen Kennedy Townsend , whose father , Robert , was assassinated 32 years ago as he ran for president .
Feinstein 's news conference included harrowing stories from individuals whose families have been shattered by guns .
Claudette Perry of Washington , D.C. , told of a 3 a.m. phone call in which she learned the son of a close friend had been shot dead in the back and of her agonizing conversation informing the mother .
As tears welled up in her eyes , and rolled down the cheeks of many others gathered in Senate hearing room , she talked of the misery inflicted on thousands of families and the loss of freedom for so many kids .
`` Do n't talk to me about your right to carry a firearm , '' she said , warning lawmakers that they have a choice of either `` signing on to active gun control legislation or signing out in November . ''
Gun supporters mocked Feinstein 's proposed restrictions , saying they would be followed only by law-abiding citizens and not by the criminals who terrorize the public with guns .
`` The American people are fundamentally skeptical that gun regulation will reduce violent crimes .
They favor strict enforcement of the existing laws , '' said Jim Manown , a spokesman for the National Rifle Association .
`` Anyone who is familiar with the landscape of the Congress knows that this bill is n't is going anywhere , '' Manown said , accusing Feinstein of engaging in little more than a publicity stunt .
`` If the senator ever chooses to leave public service , she will have a sterling career as a publicist . ''
Feinstein has been a foe of the gun lobby since she was San Francisco 's mayor nearly two decades ago and sponsored a citywide handgun ban that was approved by the Board of Supervisors but ultimately struck down by a state court .
In 1994 , as a first-term senator , she pushed through a ban on assault weapons .
