RICHMOND , Va. --
For all the political oratory and legislative proposals prompted by the Columbine school shooting rampage , one of the few fast-moving firearms bills in the nation 's statehouses this year is not a gun-control measure .
It is a ban promoted by the National Rifle Association against cities suing gun manufacturers for liability in deadly sprees by citizens .
`` It 's one of our top priorities , '' said Jim Baker , the NRA 's chief lobbyist , who estimated that the urban lawsuit ban , already enacted into law last year in 15 states , would be fully approved by 15 to 20 more states this session .
`` We expect to have two-thirds of the states done by the end of this year , '' Baker said of the bill to protect gun manufacturers , which the NRA is finding far easier to pursue on a state-by-state basis than in the federal congressional arena .
The contrast between slow-moving gun control proposals and the rapidly passing lawsuit ban was brought home first-hand here to a House delegate , James H. Dillard II .
No sooner were his three post- Columbine proposals to ban guns and hunting on Virginia 's school grounds snuffed in committee than the House passed the city lawsuit ban by a vote of 83-17 and sent it to the Senate .
`` School districts were begging for passage of my bills , but it did n't matter , '' Dillard ruefully observed .
The National League of Cities is opposed to the lawsuit ban as an unfair pre-emption of local authority .
But the league concedes that the NRA has scored a strategic victory with its relatively quiet statehouse blitz .
`` State legislatures tend to be more conservative , and the NRA has very effectively pumped tons of money into this issue , '' said Juan F. Otero , senior legislative counsel to the league .
`` The NRA let the images of Columbine dissipate and then pushed forward with this , '' said Otero , describing the lawsuit ban as a `` shameful endeavor '' that cities would eventually have to fight in home-rule constitutional challenges .
Inspired by the lead of Chicago , New Orleans and other cities with major gun-crime problems , various urban officials across the nation have been discussing the possibility of innovative lawsuits against gun manufacturers for the costly damages from shootings .
Their opponents argue that criminal use of guns is a product abuse , not the manufacturer 's fault .
The lawsuit ban is moving more easily in part because of state lawmakers ' tradition of not easily yielding dynamic prerogatives to localities , especially when they are potentially revenue producing .
Here on the statehouse level of politicking , Dillard , a 66-year -old schoolteacher and suburban Republican legislator who has long been involved in Virginia 's gun control debate , is not surprised by the rejection of his school protection bills and the rapid progress of the lawsuit ban .
`` Banning guns from schools is a no-brainer , and I think my bills would have easily passed if they had gotten beyond the committee to the House floor , '' said the Fairfax lawmaker , underlining the statehouse mix of committee power and rural dominance .
Firearm legislation is in the hands of the House Militia and Police Committee , where , Dillard notes , 18 of the 23 members have earned `` A '' ratings in the NRA 's influential legislative report card .
`` There 's no grand scheme here , '' said the committee chairman , H. Morgan Griffith , a member of the Republican leadership that took full control of Virginia 's legislature this year for the first time in more than a century .
In the turnover , the committee was revamped with rural gun rights advocates predominating over urban-suburban gun control proponents .
This is a change Dillard denounces as `` a stacked deck , '' while Griffith said it mostly reflected the results of the last election and the state 's profile .
In that election , a number of candidates in the northern suburbs near Washington campaigned on the issue of gun control in the wake of Columbine .
`` They called for restrictions , and that did n't happen , '' said Baker , the NRA lobbyist , emphasizing the voters ' rejection of a number of such candidates as the Democrats lost control of the statehouse .
-LRB- BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- The current tenor of the House was suggested in its recent endorsement of a proposed amendment to secure hunting and fishing as a state right on a par with free speech .
`` There was some fear that with the animal rights movement and so forth we ought to state it affirmatively in our constitution , '' Griffith said .
Dillard and Griffith agree that the gun issue has long played out not so much on party lines as on the clashing interests of rural and urban-suburban lawmakers .
In fact , the main sponsor of the ban on cities suing gun makers was Delegate C. Richard Cranwell of Roanoke , the House Democratic leader .
In the view of Griffith , a 41-year -old Salem lawyer who enjoys bird watching , not hunting , the Columbine tragedy `` has put more emotional energy into this issue . ''
But he insists no workable gun control bill has emerged .
The basic problem , he said , is `` more deep-seated in society '' and involves parental responsibility and the waning of youth 's respect for church and civic institutions .
`` I know the answer is not passing new gun laws that do n't have any effect on people determined to commit mass murder , '' he said .
-LRB- END OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- Dillard , a deer hunter in his boyhood and a teacher and principal for 30 years , concedes that , with the mass of ordnance now routinely available across the nation , aberrant students cannot be fully foiled from schemes of mass murder .
`` But we needed to send a clear message after Columbine that schools and guns do n't mix , '' he said .
`` We proclaim drug-free school zones despite that continuing problem , and this is the same idea . ''
Under current law , there is no outright ban on bringing weapons onto school grounds .
Current law provides for possible expulsion of armed students , but no criminal prosecution unless the guns are brandished dangerously .
As much as Columbine may have haunted the national debate , state legislative specialists find no major enactments looming on gun controls , although `` smart gun '' proposals and other high-tech alternatives to gun controls are drawing publicity .
`` It 's the teeter-totter effect , '' said Kelly Anders , a policy analyst for the National Conference of State Legislatures , referring to a general standoff she finds in most statehouses on the issue .
In Virginia , gun control proponents are not encouraged by the fact that one change being seriously studied by the militia committee under the topic of gun controls would liberalize a current law against weapons in drinking establishments to exclude restaurants .
`` You do n't want to be subject to being robbed as you come out of a family restaurant that people know you ca n't take a gun into , '' Griffith explained .
Last year 1,100 firearms bills of various sorts were submitted to statehouse hoppers , Anders said .
Of these , 150 were approved but the vast majority of these involved noncontroversial administrative changes affecting law enforcement agencies and other institutions , not private gun owners .
Despite the Columbine uproar , Anders said , `` This year may not be any different than years past . ''
