Although the leading candidates for the White House from both major parties are in broad agreement on most violent crime issues , the differences between them on gun control could hardly be wider .
From New Jersey Sen. Bill Bradley , a Democrat who is calling for a national registry for all guns , to Texas Gov. George W. Bush , a Republican who signed legislation allowing residents of his state to carry concealed weapons in church , the candidates are finding plenty to argue about .
With national crime rates at a 25-year low , the issue of violent crime in America is no longer a continental divide between Republicans and Democrats .
There is no disagreement , for example , over efforts to toughen sentencing laws for incorrigible juveniles or appointing judges who will enforce the death penalty .
But the shootings at Columbine High School in Littleton , Colo. , the North Valley Jewish Community Center in Los Angeles and Thurston High School in Springfield , Ore. , have seared the public psyche , making gun control more prominent in this year 's White House race than in the past .
The slayings have `` changed a situation where parents felt their children were not threatened because they lived in a nice safe suburb where the schools were controlled , '' said Phillip J. Cook , a Duke University professor who has studied gun violence for 20 years .
`` Now the schools are holding drills in case a mass shooting breaks out or requiring that kids trade in their canvas backpacks for transparent ones . ''
And voters , especially women and suburbanites , are taking a hard look at the candidates ' positions on handgun control .
Republican candidates vow to uphold legitimate rights of gun owners while calling for vigorous prosecution of miscreants and juveniles who misuse guns .
Democratic candidates tend to package gun control with school safety and public health proposals as a way to distance themselves from the GOP and broaden their appeal with voters .
Last week , President Clinton upped the ante in his State of the Union address when he urged states to issue photo ID licenses for handgun purchases , much like licenses for driving or hunting .
Clinton 's initiative followed House refusal to act on a milder gun control measure last year that passed the Senate , on a tie-breaking vote by Vice President Al Gore , to close a loophole in the Brady Bill by mandating a three-day waiting period on purchases at gun shows .
Hurriedly placed in a juvenile justice bill last spring after the Columbine shooting , the Senate provisions also would have required trigger locks on handguns , but the bill failed when House Republicans complained that the measures were too strong .
That series of votes has framed the tumultuous gun debate as the presidential election approaches .
Gore and Bradley , his rival for the Democratic nomination , support the provisions in the Senate version of the juvenile crime bill .
Bush and his main GOP challengers , Arizona Sen. John McCain and publisher Steve Forbes , say gun manufacturers should be urged , but not required , to sell a trigger lock with each gun .
All three would go along with instant background checks at gun shows but oppose making the shows comply with the three-day waiting period .
Clinton 's handgun licensing plan is very similar to a stronger proposal already offered by Gore , who calls for making gun licenses mandatory and requiring manufacturers and federally licensed sellers to report gun sales to state authorities .
Bradley has taken an even tougher stance by calling for a national system for registration of all firearms , saying , `` If we can register automobiles , we ought to be able to register handguns . ''
None of the Republican candidates supports gun licensing or a national registration system .
Only 12 states have some form of handgun licensing .
California is not among them , but for years the state has had a 10-day waiting period for the purchase of handguns and has checked the background of potential gun buyers .
California Gov. Gray Davis has signed legislation that requires the sale of trigger locks with every gun and imposes safety standards for handguns .
Democrats claim Bush is vulnerable on gun control , particularly in states such as California , where a Field Poll in September found that voters believe 2-to-1 that it is more important than the right to own firearms .
Bush signed two pieces of legislation in 1995 and 1997 allowing Texans to carry concealed weapons in places of worship and other public venues .
His actions also limit Texas cities from suing gun manufacturers .
`` If George W. Bush is indeed the nominee , he is wrong on gun control . ''
said Garry South , senior political adviser to Davis and an informal adviser to Gore .
`` We will kill him on this issue , '' But Bush spokesman Scott McClellan said the governor is not out of step on gun control .
`` Gov .
Bush recognizes that the problem is more than just laws .
It is about changing our culture and ushering in a responsibility era and condemning acts of terror such as school shootings . ''
But Mark DiCamillo of the Field Poll said that despite the wide support for gun control among California voters , the issue has more importance in state and local campaign than in a presidential race .
`` When you get to the big stage of the presidential race ... single issues become less of a factor , '' DiCamillo said .
`` Gun control may be one area of incremental advantage for the Democrats over the Republicans , but it is just that : an incremental advantage . ''
Still , candidates from both parties fear being portrayed as captive to extremists , both those who demand no restrictions on handgun ownership and those who would melt down every firearm .
`` Candidates will try and position themselves to represent the responsible middle , '' said Herb Asher , a political science professor at Ohio State University .
`` No one wants to take away gun ownership -- that is a common , core belief .
What we 're really talking about are the reasonable restrictions and regulations . ''
