WASHINGTON --
President Clinton keeps talking about guns .
Over the past few weeks , the White House has discussed gun shows , gun locks , gun clips , gun dealers , gun tracing , gun licenses , gun accidents , gun prosecutions , gun safety courses , guns in schools and guns in public housing .
Clinton has spoken about the recent shooting deaths of high schoolers in Washington , D.C. and in Littleton , Colo .
He honored Jim Brady , who suffered a gunshot wound to the head in the 1981 attempted assassination of President Reagan .
And in his State of the Union address last month , Clinton invited the Colorado father of a victim of the Columbine High School massacre as his personal guest .
Some would call it a full court press .
With less than a year left in his presidency , Clinton is pushing hard for `` common sense '' gun control measures .
But some North Carolina lawmakers do n't see any `` common sense '' in the proposals .
`` People in my district have great respect for the Bible and Constitution , '' said GOP Rep. Walter Jones .
`` They have the belief that if they are law-abiding citizens they have the right to purchase a gun and hunt . ''
Jones said he does not think he could support the president 's proposal to require background checks at gun shows or to require safety locks on handguns .
`` I hate to say it , but I have to be very leery of any proposal from this administration .
I think too many times these proposals are made for political gain , '' he said .
Jones , who represents a largely rural district , said his constituents are very worried about gun control and believe the proposals punish honest citizens .
In some states , such as North Carolina and Texas , several Democrats are also concerned about Clinton 's gun control wish list .
Rep. Bob Etheridge , D - N.C. , said current gun laws need to be enforced before adopting new legislation -- a mantra commonly cited by the National Rifle Association .
`` Our first and best option is enforcing the laws on the books , '' he said .
Guns should be kept away from children , from criminals and out of schools , he said , adding that existing laws should be enough to meet those goals .
In that regard , the president 's proposals to hire additional Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco and Firearms -LRB- ATF -RRB- agents and make money available to hire special gun prosecutors may be useful , Etheridge said .
However , many House members wonder if any gun issues will come before the Congress .
`` I do n't know if in the climate of this year we feel confident that the Republicans will take up the president 's agenda , '' said Etheridge spokesman Brad Woodhouse .
Since action on Clinton 's gun control agenda is unlikely , Etheridge has not spent a lot of time thinking about requiring safety locks on firearms or a ban on importing large capacity ammunition clips or `` magazines , '' Woodhouse said .
Last year , gun control took the spotlight in Congress after Columbine High School students Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold horrified the nation by using high-powered guns to murder 12 students and a teacher before killing themselves .
The tragedy and other highly-publicized school shootings had a great impact on the public and lawmakers despite the fact that gun homicides have dropped over the past few years .
According to the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics , gun homicides in the United States dropped from 14,740 in 1995 to 10,976 in 1998 .
Homicides committed by teens between the ages of 14 and 17 also dropped from 2,692 in 1995 to 1,433 in 1998 .
Gun control proponents argue that the numbers are still staggering and that gun violence will only drop significantly when the number of firearms is reduced .
A month after the Columbine shooting , the Senate stunned the powerful gun lobby and voted for a juvenile justice bill which included stricter background checks on buyers at gun shows .
The 50-50 vote allowed Vice President Al Gore to cast an unusual tie-breaking vote .
For months , the bill has been stuck in a House - Senate conference committee that is trying to resolve differences .
Last week , Republicans said they are considering stripping the bill of the controversial gun control provisions in an effort to pass the underlying $ 1.5 billion bill , which would impose stiffer penalties on teens convicted of weapons crimes , as well as allow state governments to post the Ten Commandments in public buildings .
At the same time , Senate Democrats are expected to offer gun control amendments to one of 13 pending appropriations bills although the details are still unclear .
Rep. Eva Clayton , D - N.C. , said that some of Clinton 's gun proposals do have a chance of passing this year .
Getting the Republican -led Congress to take up the president 's gun control agenda will be tough , but not impossible , she said .
`` I would think because this is an important issue people will want to appear to be responsible and some of this will be included in the budgeting process , '' she said .
The development of tracing technology and hiring additional ATF agents and gun prosecutors stand the best chance , she said .
Clayton said she readily supports Clinton 's proposals to ban importing large capacity ammo clips , require safety locks , set waiting periods for buyers and have firearms registration .
Her stand on gun control has not been popular with some of her constituents , friends and family members who are either hunters or gun owners .
Clayton argues that no one complains about rights violations when they are licensed to drive vehicles , to hunt or to perform other tasks .
So why should the licensing of firearms be a constitutional violation , she asks .
`` When I am at an airport there are security measures and if something sounds then they floss me down with the -LRB- metal detector -RRB- wand , '' she said .
`` I may grumble but I realize it 's for the safety of others . ''
Gun control advocates and most Democrats say that the GOP will get hammered at the polls if it fails to pass some form of gun control .
But some North Carolina House members would n't mind that at all -- especially if lawmakers abandon a proposed 72-hour waiting period to purchase firearms at gun shows .
The gun show waiting period is probably the most controversial gun control provision this year .
Some lawmakers are proposing a shorter one-day wait while others prefer some kind of instant check .
Common sense should prevail when writing any waiting period legislation , Clayton said .
Depending on location and available technology , some gun show sellers may be able to perform 24 or 48 hour background checks while others may need to wait longer , she said .
Clayton also questions whether purchasers of shotguns and rifles need the type of background examination a handgun purchaser would , since handguns are used in the majority of violent gun crime .
Clinton weighed in on the issue earlier this month , saying that the waiting period is necessary to provide a `` cooling-off period '' for somebody `` who is really hot '' and `` buys a gun with a bad intent . ''
In addition , Clinton said the waiting period must be long enough to allow gun sellers to make the checks .
`` If you move away from 72 hours to a shorter period , then the question is , since so many of these gun shows occur on the weekend , will there be access to the records to do the check , '' Clinton said .
Jones said he has attended several gun shows in Greenville and Jacksonville .
People there are collectors , not criminals , he said .
In light of his views , Jones receives support from the National Rifle Association , which contributed $ 6,000 to his 1998 campaign .
Organizations on both sides of the gun control debate contributed $ 41,800 to 1998 congressional candidates from North Carolina , according to the Center for Responsive Politics , a nonpartisan watchdog group that tabulates campaign finance reports .
The NRA contributed $ 34,800 to eight candidates and Handgun Control Inc. , the nation 's largest pro-gun control group , contributed $ 7,000 to two candidates , including $ 3,000 to Clayton .
Etheridge received no money from either side .
So far , for this year 's election , the NRA has spent $ 16,000 in the state on congressional candidates and Handgun Control Inc. has spent no money .
-LRB- Eunice Moscoso can be reached by e-mail at eunicem -LRB- at -RRB- coxnews.com .
Ginger Livingston can be reached by e-mail at gingerl -LRB- at -RRB- coxnews.com -RRB- ENDIT
