WASHINGTON --
President Clinton pressed Congress on Wednesday to pass new gun controls by April 20 , the anniversary of the killings at Columbine High School last year .
Clinton likened the need for gun controls to the requirement for metal detectors in airports and driver 's licenses and speed limits on highways , saying that simply punishing criminals for using firearms will not stop the problem of gun violence .
`` I think that it 's just wrong to say that , because of the Second Amendment , and because there are a lot of people who like to hunt and sports shoot , that prevention plays no role in this , '' said Clinton .
`` A sensible society has a balance between prevention and punishment . ''
Clinton made the remarks at a wide-ranging press conference he called to try to focus Congress on a slate of domestic priorities he hopes to get passed in the remaining months of his presidency .
He called on the Republican -controlled Congress to pass his requests for : -- Tax breaks meant to encourage development of energy-saving technologies and petroleum alternatives such as ethanol fuels .
-- A voluntary prescription-drug benefit for Medicare participants .
-- A so-called patients ' bill of rights , strengthening the hand of consumers in their dealings with hospitals , insurance companies and health maintenance organizations .
-- A $ 1-an-hour increase , over two years , in the minimum wage , which is currently $ 5.15 an hour .
-- Permanent normal trade relations with China , ending the annual debate over the terms of trade between the United States and the world 's most populous nation .
-- Federal regulation of the tobacco industry by the Food and Drug Administration .
`` When Congress adjourns this summer , we ought to be able to look back and say we took real steps to make America better , '' Clinton said .
`` The American people want action and they deserve it . ''
Headlining Clinton 's list of legislative priorities was his insistence that Congress pass a bill that would require childproof gun safety locks , outlaw the import of large ammunition clips and mandate background checks for gun purchasers at flea markets and gun shows .
Those provisions are contained in a Senate juvenile justice bill , which the companion House version has no gun control provisions .
A conference committee has been charged with working out compromise legislation .
The committee has n't met , however , since Aug. 5 , and Clinton accused the Republican -controlled Congress of dragging its feet on the legislation .
`` It appears the opponents of reform have run out of arguments , so now they 're just trying to run out the clock , '' said Clinton .
`` This makes no sense . ''
Clinton has challenged Congress to pass the legislation before the April 20 anniversary of the tragedy at Columbine High School , in Littleton , Colo. , where 12 students and a teacher were shot dead by two teenagers who then took their own lives .
`` That deadline can still be met , '' said Clinton .
The National Rifle Association has accused Clinton of failing to aggressively prosecute criminals who use guns .
Clinton has denied that charge , adding that punishing criminals will not , by itself , solve the problem of gun violence .
`` What if I said , you know , most people who drive are good , honest , responsible people , and we should just , we ought to repeal the laws , the driver 's license laws , and repeal the speed limits and the next time somebody does something wrong and has a 25-car pile-up , we 'll just throw the book at ` em , '' said Clinton .
`` I mean , a sensible society has a balance between prevention and punishment . ''
-LRB- Story can end here .
Optional add follows . -RRB-
Clinton also addressed the difficulties he has faced in recent days trying to get stalled peace talks restarted between Israel and Syria .
After meeting for three hours in Geneva on Sunday with Syrian President Hafez Assad , Clinton was unable to get him back to the bargaining table with Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak .
On Wednesday , Clinton laid the blame for the impasse squarely at Assad 's doorstep .
`` He now knows in great detail what the Israeli proposals were .
And I believe since they have made an effort to be specific and comprehensive , if we 're going to make progress , they should now be able to know what his specific and comprehensive response is on all the issues , '' said Clinton .
Under Clinton 's auspices , Barak and Syrian Foreign Minister Farouk al- Sharaa held a week of peace talks in January in Sheperdstown , W.Va. The talks broke up , though , after Syria refused to proceed until Israel vowed to return the Golan Heights territories it captured during the 1967 Arab - Israeli war .
Israel is seeking security guarantees as the price of the Golan 's return .
Assad has declined to spell out the terms of peace , however , unless Israel first pledges to return all of the Golan territories .
`` There 's more than one issue here , '' said Clinton .
`` And if we 're going to have a negotiation , I do n't think it 's enough to say , ` I do n't like your position .
Come back and see me when I like your position . ' ''
Clinton said the way to address the dispute is through negotiations , not stalemate .
`` I understand how strongly he -LRB- Assad -RRB- feels , '' said Clinton .
`` But if he disagrees with their territorial proposal , which is quite significant , then there should be some other proposal , I think , coming from the Syrians about how their concerns could be handled . ''
Bob Deans 's e-mail address is bobdeans -LRB- at -RRB- coxnews.com ENDIT
