WASHINGTON --
Surrounded by organizers of Sunday 's so-called Million Mom March for tougher gun laws , Sen. Dianne Feinstein introduced a bill Tuesday to require buyers of handguns and certain semiautomatic weapons to get licenses .
`` When you want to hunt , you get a hunting license ; when you want to fish , you get a fishing license , but when you want a gun , no license is required , '' the California Democrat said at a news conference announcing her proposal .
Feinstein said the legislation is needed because each day 80 people , including 12 children , are killed by guns in the United States .
She said she does not expect her measure to pass this year but predicted it will be buoyed by the tens of thousands of mothers who plan to demonstrate on Mother 's Day in the nation 's capital and 67 other cities against gun violence .
Under Feinstein 's proposal current owners of handguns and semiautomatic firearms that can use detachable ammunition clips would have up to 10 years to get licenses .
Buyers of new guns would pay a $ 25 fee to a firearms dealer or a state-certified entity to get licenses .
Applicants would have to provide their date and place of birth .
They would also have to pass a background check and a written firearm-safety test and sign a pledge to keep weapons safely stored .
Sen. Frank R. Lautenberg , D - N.J. , the chief co-sponsor of the measure , said the Senate `` does not have enough votes to pass sensible gun control legislation '' because of the power of the National Rifle Association .
But he asked , `` What could be a better fight ?
A mother has to know that her kids are safe .
Why should n't we be able to get some action in this place ? ''
Sen. Barbara Boxer , D - Calif. , said gun control advocates `` cannot allow those people who are against what we 're trying to do to paralyze us , to freeze us in place . ''
Feinstein said only one lobby can stand up to the NRA -- women .
She said the Million Mom March is just `` the beginning of an effort to mobilize women . ''
The senator said that `` for years we 've been hearing from gun owners who say they have rights . ''
She added , ` We have rights to walk down the street and not get shot . ''
Donna Dees - Thomases of Short Falls , N.J. , founder of the Million Mom March , said Feinstein 's gun-licensing legislation is her top priority .
`` We put that on our agenda since day one , '' she said .
The organization also favors gun registration .
Dees - Thomases said she expects at least 150,000 mothers to demonstrate in Washington , D.C. Sunday .
She also predicted that tens of thousands of women , including large numbers of `` stroller-moms '' with young children , will turn out to protest in Denver , Atlanta , Chicago and Los Angeles .
She said the main objective of the march is to urge women to find out how their lawmakers are voting on gun control legislation .
`` This is about mothers taking responsibility for themselves , '' she said .
The march organizers are also pushing for passage of gun control measures in the so-called juvenile justice bill , passed in different forms by both houses of Congress last year .
The legislation has been stalled in a conference committee for more than 10 months .
The most controversial part of the stalled bill is a measure that would require that private dealers at gun shows check the backgrounds of would-be firearm buyers .
The legislation would also require safety locks on handguns , ban the sale of assault weapons to minors and stop the import of high capacity ammunition clips .
-LRB- Judy Holland can be reached at 202-298-6920 or by e-mail at Judy -LRB- at -RRB- hearstdc.com -RRB-
