DENVER --
With a succession of mass shootings as a backdrop and the November elections ahead , political wrangling over gun control is emerging as a major issue in many states as lawmakers gather this week for the start of the 2000 legislative sessions .
In the wake of killings at Columbine High School and elsewhere , polls show that a growing number of Americans are demanding that their state representatives do something to reduce gun violence .
Last year , state legislatures considered more than 1,000 gun-related bills .
About 50 proposed to tighten controls over access , and more than half of them were signed into law .
Many that were not passed last year are expected to be debated again this year .
`` To say it 's going to be an active legislative year is an understatement , '' said James J. Baker , chief lobbyist for the National Rifle Association .
`` There may not be more gun legislation under consideration than last year , but there will certainly be as much . ''
Lawmakers in almost every state are preparing to debate measures that would affect gun ownership .
Following are three of the more prominent examples : -- In California , the Democrats who control both houses of the legislature , plan to build on the tough restrictions they passed last year with a new proposal to require that gun dealers be licensed and the guns they sell be registered , much like motor vehicles .
But Gov. Gray Davis , also a Democrat , has asked for a moratorium on any ambitious new gun legislation .
-- A fight among Republicans is expected to continue in Illinois , where Gov. George Ryan , a moderate who favors tighter restrictions on gun access , lost to Senate Republicans , who defeated a bill that would have maintained the penalty for carrying a concealed weapon as a felony .
The governor has vowed to bring up the measure again in the session that begins next week .
-- In Maryland , lawmakers will consider legislation that would require trigger locks for guns as a way to prevent accidental shootings by children .
If the legislation is passed , Maryland would become just the sixth state to require that safety devices be part of any sale , joining California , Connecticut , Massachusetts , New Jersey and Pennsylvania .
But in Maryland , the legislative fight is expected to be waged across urban-rural lines , with members of both parties on each side .
Lawmakers from urban areas generally favor the legislation , and those from rural areas oppose it .
Randy Kozuch , the rifle association 's director of state and local affairs , said that in addition to fighting proposed gun control measures , NRA lobbyists would be pushing for legislation that bars municipalities from suing companies that manufacture guns and ammunition .
Last year , he said , 14 states passed such measures , and in the months ahead , he predicted that as many as 20 more might do the same .
Both Baker , the NRA lobbyist , and Joe Sudbay , director of state legislation for Handgun Control , a nonprofit organization that supports tighter ownership restrictions , agreed that the shootings in Columbine , in which 14 students and a teacher died , had played a role in spurring efforts to pass new gun restrictions .
But unlike Baker , who predicted that few states would tighten controls , Sudbay said public sentiment is forcing more states to take stronger action , especially with an election 10 months away .
As an example , he cited Pennsylvania , where the Republican governor , Tom Ridge , and the state Legislature are generally sympathetic to gun owners .
Last year , Pennsylvania passed a law that denied local jurisdictions the right to sue gun makers , but Ridge also signed into law a child-safety measure .
`` People are fed up , '' Sudbay said .
`` Mothers are afraid of sending their kids to school . ''
Perhaps nowhere has the debate over gun control gained a higher profile than here in Colorado , where state lawmakers expect to consider at least five measures that would further restrict access to guns .
The number of bills is not so unusual , even for a Western state where people look askance at government intervention and Republicans have controlled both houses of the legislature since 1976 .
Democrats introduce them all the time .
But this year , support for tightening access to guns has been led by Gov. Bill Owens , a Republican , who said the Columbine shootings convinced him that the state needs to take a more `` common-sense approach '' to gun laws .
`` Columbine forced me and others to take a look at our current system of gun regulations , '' Owens said in an interview .
`` I realized tre are some areas we need to fill in with new laws . ''
As a result , Owens has been working to build bipartisan support for a series of measures , some of which have been defeated in the past .
They would require background checks for purchases made at gun shows , raise to 21 from 18 the minimum age to buy a handgun at a gun show , make it illegal for someone to buy a gun at a show to give to someone else , include juvenile records in background checks of all firearm purchases and create liability for the unsafe storage of firearms in the home .
In addition , a Colorado Springs Republican , Sen. Mary Anne Tebedo , said she planned to introduce a bill to standardize concealed weapon laws .
Colorado is one of 31 states in which people can carry a weapon , but local sheriffs , rather than state regulations , determine the criteria for issuing the permit .
So far , Democrats have agreed to sponsor three of Owens ' bills ; Republicans , two .
And leaders of both parties are predicting that as many as three of the measures might reach Owens for signing this year .
Owens said their passage could make Colorado a model for other states .
But lawmakers in both parties said they doubted any action here would spur a national trend inasmuch as few believe that any of the measures Owens support would have prevented an incident like Columbine .
But John Head , co-president of Safe Colorado , a new state gun-control lobbying group , said he applauded Owens ' efforts .
`` I do n't want to see perfect drive out the good , '' he said .
`` If you try to go too far , nothing happens .
You have to deal with these things one step at a time . ''
