NEW YORK --
Return with us now to those thrilling days of yesteryear -- the 1960s .
Cities like Newark and Detroit were going up in flames .
Public figures were being assassinated at a numbing rate .
And crime was beginning its long , relentless climb to horrifying heights .
Lyndon Johnson thought it might be prudent to do something about guns .
He called for the registration of all firearms and said all gun owners should be licensed .
After Sirhan Sirhan shot Robert Kennedy with a snub-nosed .22-caliber revolver , Johnson implored Congress `` in the name of sanity ... in the name of safety , and in the name of an aroused nation , to give America the gun control it needs . ''
Not a chance .
The gun lobby would n't hear of it .
Robert J. Spitzer , in his book `` The Politics of Gun Control , '' noted the hysterical reaction of Harold W. Glassen , the president of the National Rifle Association , to a watered-down version of Johnson 's proposal .
Glassen said the legislation was part of an effort to `` foist upon an unsuspecting and aroused public a law that would , through its operation , sound the death knell for the shooting sport and eventually disarm the American public . ''
The NRA and its allies and lackeys in Congress made sure Americans were not disarmed .
We have the body counts to prove it .
According to Handgun Control , a group that lobbies for stricter gun laws , `` More Americans were killed with guns in the 18-year period between 1979 and 1997 -LRB- 651,697 -RRB- than were killed in battle in all wars since 1775 -LRB- 650,858 -RRB- . ''
Osha Gray Davidson , in his 1998 book `` Under Fire : The NRA and the Battle for Gun Control , '' wrote : `` The list of casualties from this country 's gun violence does , indeed , read like the body count of a major war .
In the United States today , one person dies by gunshot every eighteen minutes , 24 hours a day .
In a year , that adds up to nearly 30,000 deaths .
In two years , more Americans are killed by guns here at home than died in the entire Vietnam War .
Of that annual total , about 15,000 commit suicide , 11,000 are murdered , and some 1,500 die in accidents involving guns . ''
Lyndon Johnson said , `` Our citizens must get licenses to fish , to hunt and to drive .
Certainly no less should be required for the possession of lethal weapons that have caused so much horror and heartbreak in this country . ''
The gun lobby was not amused .
The NRA is more than a powerful , single-issue lobbying group .
It 's a radical , inflammatory , obsessive outfit , deaf to public opinion , that has stood like a colossus in the way of reasonable gun control , and thus has contributed mightily to the long decades of carnage in our streets and homes .
It has learned nothing constructive since the 1960s .
Which brings us to Wayne LaPierre , the group 's current executive vice president .
All you need to know about LaPierre 's leadership role with the NRA is summed up in a passage he wrote in a 1992 column in American Rifleman magazine .
It was cited in Davidson 's book : `` If the NRA was an army at war , and we knew an enemy train was carrying troops to the front in an attempt to turn the tide of battle , it would be our duty ... to take up the tracks , or blow up a bridge ... because when you 're at war , you do what it takes to win . ''
Last Sunday , on national television , LaPierre made the disgusting assertion that President Clinton was willing to accept a certain amount of violence and killing to further the interests of gun control .
In his twisted logic , tragedies like the killings at Columbine High School strengthened the case for gun control -- at least in the minds of some people -- and therefore were acceptable or in some sense tolerable to Clinton .
Here 's how LaPierre put it : `` I 've come to believe that he needs a certain level of violence in this country .
He 's willing to accept a certain level of killing to further his political agenda and his vice president , too . ''
The Times , in an editorial , denounced what it described as LaPierre 's `` sick suggestion . ''
Wednesday LaPierre continued his rant against Clinton , all but blaming him for a gun death last year .
What gun control advocates really need are more Wayne LaPierres .
He embodies the extremism and the craziness embedded in the policies and the philosophy of the NRA .
The higher his profile , the better .
