BUENOS AIRES , Argentina
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Marcelo Cattaneo , a prominent businessman , had been missing five days when a fisherman seeking shelter from a thunderstorm found him .
Peering up from an abandoned building beside the muddy Plata River , the fisherman saw Cattaneo 's lifeless body , clad in a blue jogging suit , hanging from an antenna tower .
Police said Cattaneo _facing a likely court appearance in a bribery investigation involving computer giant IBM and Argentina 's Banco Nacion -- had apparently killed himself .
But opposition politicians and a skeptical press have n't been so easily persuaded .
For them , it 's another eerie twist to the scandals that have plagued President Carlos Menem 's nine-year administration .
`` In Argentina , we have a habit of returning to these kind of events , '' Graciela Fernandez Meijide , a top opposition party leader , said this week .
Cattaneo 's death is the third this year of a figure linked to a scandal investigation .
The death dominated news coverage this week , and like the others , revealed a public weary of scandal and prone to believe government abuses of power are rampant .
`` Each time more suspicion '' proclaimed a headline in the daily , Diario Popular .
`` With the seal of the Mafia '' added Pagina 12 .
La Nacion spoke of `` strange deaths involving key witnesses in various scandals . ''
Reclusive businessman Alfredo Yabran was found dead May 20 of a gunshot wound at his country estate .
He was wanted for questioning in the slaying of a journalist , a case that had gripped the country for more than a year .
Horacio Estrada , a former navy captain , was expected to be a key witness in a suspicious arms sale .
He died Aug. 25 .
`` These kinds of scandals keep coming up .
No one is ever charged with anything .
If they are , they usually go free , '' said Julio Jorge , a 42-year -old medical inspector .
`` I 'm getting tired of it . ''
More and more , official accounts of these cases are being second-guessed and speculation of foul play is growing .
`` In the late 80 's the perception of strange suicides and odd kidnappings was assumed to be leftover from the military 's rule , '' said political analyst Felipe Noguera .
`` Now , the perception is it 's related to organized crime with possible links to the government . ''
Menem has discouraged a rush to judgment .
`` We have to trust the justice system .
We ca n't jump to conclusions , '' he told the newspaper Clarin .
As for suggestions of foul play , he added : `` Those that believe that it was murder , think like the Mafia . ''
For years , investigators have been probing accusations that IBM distributed millions of dollars in bribes to government and bank officials to win a dlrs 249 million contract with Banco Nacion , the former state-owned bank .
IBM denies any wrongdoing .
Cattaneo was cleared of any involvement in that case two years ago .
But he had been expected to return to court for questioning on fresh accusations by two former bank officers he implicated .
The public uproar surrounding his death echoed that of Yabran .
At the time of his death , Yabran was the subject of a police hunt in connection with the 1997 slaying of photojournalist Jose Luis Cabezas , who had taken some of the few photographs of the highly private Yabran .
Polls after Yabran 's death showed few people believed government and police assertions that the businessman had killed himself .
As in Yabran 's death , Cattaneo 's was the talk of the country , and many suspected foul play .
`` I did n't believe the Yabran explanation and I have my doubts about Cattaneo , '' said shopkeeper Judy Garcia .
`` People have no confidence in what the government says .
It all involves so many questionable people . ''
Add to that the death of Estrada , who was under orders to appear before a judge probing suspect weapons sales to Ecuador and Croatia , in apparent violation of international embargoes .
He was found dead in his apartment , with a gunshot to the head .
Taken together , the deaths have left the Argentine public brooding .
`` Who knows if we 'll ever know the truth of any of this , '' said Marcelo Gomez , a clerk at a coin-operated laundry .
