GENEVA
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
A Swiss prosecutor said Thursday that alleged Russian mafia boss Sergei Mikhailov posed a real threat to western society and should be found guilty of charges of belonging to an illegal organization .
Speaking at the end of a two-week trial , Jean - Louis Crochet praised all the witnesses who had dared to testify against Mikhailov , some under heavy protection .
`` If you find him guilty you will have said he has tried to disrupt national order and infiltrate himself into Switzerland , '' Crochet told the jury of six .
`` We will have succeeded in putting an end sufficiently early to the gangrene for western society which organized crime represents . ''
Defense lawyer Xavier Magne said his client should be acquitted because the charges against him were without foundation .
Magne said that Mikhailov was a pawn in the fight against organized crime in Switzerland , even though nobody had filed for his extradition .
Mikhailov , 40 , is charged with being a member in a criminal organization and lesser charges of forgery and violating Switzerland 's property laws .
In a four-hour summation , Crochet pointed to the evidence of witnesses from half a dozen countries about Mikhailov 's activities .
He highlighted the testimony of retired FBI special agent Robert Levinson , who described the structure of the Solntsevskaya mafia organization , of which Mikhailov is allegedly the leader , and links to the United States .
Crochet also praised the courage of witnesses who told the court they had been subject to threats and beatings from Solntsevskaya .
`` Organized crime has the aim of taking control of the economy and exerting influence over politics .
The rule of silence is the golden rule , '' he said .
Mikhailov , who has been in custody in Switzerland for two years , denies the charges against him and claims he is an ordinary businessman , though he admits to being `` very , very rich . ''
The verdict is expected Friday or Saturday .
If convicted , Mikhailov faces a maximum of 7 1/2 years in jail .
