PHILADELPHIA
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Joseph `` Skinny Joey '' Merlino , reputed boss of the Philadelphia mob , is accused of murder , racketeering and extortion in an indictment reached with help from his predecessor , authorities said Friday .
The 37-count indictment accused Merlino of killing three men and trying to kill another .
Ten other people named in the indictment are accused of various charges ranging from murder to conspiracy to illegal gambling .
Former boss Ralph Natale allegedly ceded control of the Philadelphia - South Jersey mob to Merlino in 1998 .
When Natale agreed to cooperate with authorities last summer , he became the highest-ranking American Mafia figure to flip sides .
`` I cannot overstate the significance of this case .
Not only does it reach to the highest levels of organized crime , significant evidence comes from the highest levels of organized crime . ...
That has never occurred before , '' U.S. Attorney Michael Stiles said .
`` That in my judgment represents a complete collapse of this criminal organization . ''
Merlino already is jailed on drug charges .
Of the others , eight were arrested Friday , and two were arrested earlier and freed on bail .
The indictment links Merlino and others with the murders of William Veasey , Joseph Sodano and Anthony Turra along with the attempted murder of Joseph Ciancaglini Jr. The Philadelphia Inquirer reported Thursday that Gaetano `` Tommy Horsehead '' Scafidi had agreed to cooperate with authorities and help them build a case that linked Merlino and others to the 1993 attempted murder of Ciancaglini .
The shooting started a war between the Merlino faction of the mob and an organization headed by then-mob boss John Stanfa .
Ciancaglini was a Stanfa underboss , authorities said .
The indictment also accuses some of the defendants of operating a widespread mob protection racket that preyed on bookmakers , numbers operators , video poker machine operators and others involved in criminal activity in Philadelphia and southern New Jersey .
Robert S. Conforti , the FBI 's special agent in charge in Philadelphia , said Merlino 's organization did business `` the old-fashioned mob way -- extortion , bookmaking , manufacture and distribution of heroin , theft and murder . ''
Recently , however , it has not `` proved to be a good line of work , '' Conforti said , citing 24 mob members who have been imprisoned and at least 15 who were killed over the past two decades .
In December , Merlino pleaded innocent to federal charges of racketeering and conspiracy in a $ 1.3 million theft ring .
A 12-count indictment accused him and 13 others of engaging in drug trafficking and operating a scheme involving products stolen from city rail yards .
Merlino was acquitted Oct. 21 of charges that he threatened to kill an organized crime investigator who arrested him in June at his house in Margate , N.J .
