NEW YORK --
When two young stockbrokers were found shot to death in an affluent New Jersey suburb last week , the headlines may have conjured up an image of well-tailored suits and polished wingtips , a carpeted blue-chip world where violence is usually a stranger .
In fact , both victims , Albert Alain Chalem , 41 , and Maier Lehmann , 37 , worked in the seedy world of `` penny stocks , '' cheap but very risky securities that are easily manipulated by insiders at the expense of naive public investors .
This is not an elegant world : The now-indicted penny-stock brokerage firm where Chalem had worked once arranged to receive its mail at Body by Boris , a commercial gymnasium in Red Bank , N.J. But until recently , even this gritty stretch of Wall Street had been considered relatively safe territory , where bribes were far more likely than bullets .
The killings last week , although still not definitively linked to the victims ' business life , nevertheless underscored what people who have studied the industry for years had already concluded : Violence among people involved in stock fraud is on the rise .
Criminal cases prosecuted against penny-stock figures in the past two years have offered many examples that point to this new brutality : Claudio Iodice , a stock promoter , was accused by federal prosecutors in Manhattan of threatening a knife attack against the family of a penny-stock company 's chairman .
He strongly denies the charge but has been unable to stand trial because he swallowed what his lawyer called `` a very caustic substance '' that required the removal of his esophagus .
His lawyer said that the injury was accidental .
Barclay Davis , another New York City stock promoter , has pleaded guilty to charges that he tried to hire a hit man to attack his 67-year -old accountant , who had agreed to testify against Davis in a stock manipulation case .
On a tape recording in that case , Davis directed the hit man , actually an undercover agent , to attack a speculator who he thought was trying to drive down the price of the penny stock Davis was promoting : `` I want him hospitalized .
Broken legs , whatever , '' he said .
Ian Richard Hosang pleaded guilty in March to federal conspiracy and money-laundering charges in a stock manipulation case in which , prosecutors said , he and some associates had beaten up a rival stockbroker and hung him from his heels out of the ninth-story window of a Manhattan office building .
The defendants in a federal penny-stock fraud conspiracy case filed this summer in Tampa , Fla. -- including Philip Abramo , identified in the indictment as a member of the DeCavalcante crime family -- were accused of using their `` relationship to the Mafia '' to threaten uncooperative brokers , threats that became more potent after the murder of a Bahamian connected to a company controlled by the defendants .
The same defendants were also accused of taking handguns and a baseball bat into the Drake Hotel in Manhattan to threaten another penny-stock operator whom they suspected of swindling them out of $ 1.7 million .
The defendants deny the charges .
`` The profits in penny-stock fraud can be as good as the profits in cocaine , prostitution and loan sharking , and it 's always been a lot safer , '' said John Woods , the editor of Stock Watch , a news service based in Vancouver , British Columbia , that monitors that region 's penny-stock industry .
`` Now , with this frothy market , it is a lot more profitable than it has ever been before , but it is no longer as safe . ''
The killings , which were a hot topic of conversation last week in circles ranging from securities law to Internet chat rooms , occurred late on the evening of Oct. 25 in the scenic horse-country town of Colts Neck , N.J. The two victims , their cellular phones nearby , were found inside the lavish mansion where Chalem lived with his girlfriend , whose family owned the home .
Both men had been shot repeatedly in the head , and there was no sign of forced entry or burglary .
igators have not ruled out the possibility that a personal motive , unrelated to their business dealings , may have led to the deaths .
But John Kaye , the Monmouth County prosecutor , who is overseeing the case , said that investigators strongly suspected that the killings stemmed from the men 's tangled and clearly questionable business activities .
They operated an Internet stock-promotion Web site -- StockInvestor.com -- that featured an analyst 's reports that were outdated and , according to the analyst , pirated from other Web sites without permission .
Lehmann had a criminal record for mail fraud and , without admitting or denying his guilt , had paid $ 630,000 to settle regulatory charges that stemmed from a 1997 stock manipulation case .
Chalem had spent more than a year as a broker for A.S. Goldmen & Co. , a penny-stock firm based in Iselin , N.J. , that was charged with fraud and racketeering in a case filed in July by the Manhattan district attorney 's office .
Officials of the firm have denied any wrongdoing .
Goldmen is the firm that had its mail occasionally forwarded to the Body by Boris gym .
Moreover , people who have reviewed the two men 's dealings with regulators say that both victims had provided information to law-enforcement or regulatory agencies in recent years , prompting some speculation that the killings were carried out either in retribution or as a way of preventing further cooperation .
Penny -stock swindles have been a fixture of every stock-market boom since World War II , several white-collar crime experts pointed out .
But in the past , such schemes were typically carried out without visible violence , perhaps as a way of ensuring that securities fraud , as a nonviolent crime , would remain a low priority for law enforcement .
`` Cooler , wiser heads knew that you did n't want to attract attention by having people showing up dead in million-dollar mansions , '' said Howard Sirota , a defense lawyer experienced in white-collar crime cases .
`` But this new , younger breed has all come of age in a market that goes up and up and up .
They feel invincible , and they have gone completely over the top now . ''
Christopher Bruno , who was one of the federal prosecutors that handled the Davis case , said that it has become increasingly dangerous to interfere in stock promoters ' carefully choreographed efforts to manipulate the prices of penny stocks .
`` In this current environment , anyone who seeks to undermine the carefully structured penny-stock deals places themselves at risk of suffering extremely violent consequences , '' Bruno said Monday .
One factor contributing to this rise in violence , several former law-enforcement officials said , may be the invasion of the penny-stock business by organized-crime figures from Russia and Eastern Europe , who have a reputation for extraordinary ruthlessness .
`` The rules of engagement have changed dramatically , '' said Martin Pollner , a former director of law-enforcement for the Treasury Department who is now with the Manhattan firm of Loeb & Loeb .
`` We sort of ` tamed ' other elements of organized crime , but with the new wave coming in , those old rules no longer apply .
We are back to the old Al Capone days . ''
But even the traditional crime families seem to be resorting to increasingly violent methods to enforce stock-fraud activities , perhaps because of growing competition from the recent arrivals , suggested Norman Willox , chief executive of the National Fraud Center , a consulting firm in Philadelphia .
`` The Russians have redefined what organized crime is in the United States , helping to create an environment in which any organized-crime group will work with any other for common ends , but with very little or no trust between them , '' he said .
`` As a result , there clearly has been an increase in violence in this area , and I think it is going to increase .
We have n't even seen the tip of the iceberg yet . ''
Federal regulators have acknowledged at Senate hearings this year that elements of organized crime have made visible , although limited , inroads into the penny-stock world .
But balancing that ominous development , they said , has been the increased cooperation between the federal Securities and Exchange Commission and federal and state prosecutors around the country , especially in the New York region and in Florida .
`` We have felt in the past that our civil remedies were simply not enough to achieve deterrence in the penny stock world , '' said Richard Walker , the director of enforcement for the commission .
`` They were just considered a price of doing business . ''
But now the risk that convicted penny-stock swindlers will go to prison has greatly increased , Walker said .
`` I think our efforts have had bite and impact , '' he said .
The increased enforcement pressure may even be one factor contributing to the increased violence , especially regarding attacks on people believed to be cooperating with the authorities , Walker said .
`` Clearly , the consequences are far more serious for people if they are caught , and it may well have led to greater desperation among the people involved , '' he said .
But Woods , the Vancouver editor , said that crime figures are no doubt balancing any perceived increase in the riskiness of stock manipulation against the `` absolutely astronomical '' rewards being generated by the extraordinary stock-market boom .
That boom is luring neophyte investors who are easy prey for the unscrupulous , especially those hiding behind the anonymity of the Internet , he said .
Whatever the sources of this new violence , many experienced securities lawyers are predicting that the killings last week will merely intensify the federal interest in pursuing penny-stock cases , especially those involving organized-crime connections .
`` I think you 're going to see a huge effort to crack down on everyone who is involved in organized crime on Wall Street , '' said Sirota , the lawyer .
`` You just ca n't go around killing cooperating witnesses . ''
