ROME --
Closing a chapter in Italian postwar history , a three-judge panel in Palermo on Saturday acquitted Giulio Andreotti , seven times prime minister of Italy , of charges that he was the Sicilian Mafia 's main protector in Rome .
The tensely awaited verdict was a vindication for the 80-year -old Andreotti , who has spent much of the last decade in court .
`` Obviously I am delighted , '' he said after watching the verdict , announced live on national television , in his Senate office in Rome .
`` It was not so great to have to wait so many years .
I consider the case closed . ''
The outcome was not entirely unexpected .
In a trial in Perugia last September , Andreotti was acquitted of conspiring in the 1979 murder of a muckraking journalist .
In Palermo , as in Perugia , prosecutors relied heavily on the testimony of `` pentiti , '' Mafia members turned cooperative witnesses .
The prosecution presented more hearsay than hard evidence .
But the verdict in Sicily was not quite the full exoneration that Andreotti won in Perugia , where he was acquitted of committing the crime .
Judges in Palermo instead concluded that there was insufficient evidence to convict .
In Sicily , where the grip of the Mafia is still felt , that distinction may have reflected suspicions that organized crime could not have thrived so long without some help from the powers-that-be .
The six-year trial in Palermo , which involved more than 300 witnesses , including 30 cooperative Mafia witnesses , was viewed as Italy 's `` trial of the century . ''
Andreotti was the power broker of the Christian Democratic Party , which governed Italy for almost 50 years .
He remains the personification of a system that disintegrated in the early ' 90s under the weight of its own corruption .
In some ways , Italian society was on trial alongside the former prime minister .
`` I am relieved , '' said Sergio Romano , a former ambassador who writes frequent editorials on Italian politics .
`` Had he been condemned , the entire country would have been held responsible .
It is absolutely impossible to be governed for such a long time by people in collusion with organized crime and not know it .
It would have cast a horrible shadow on the entire country . ''
Now , a shadow is growing over Italian prosecutors , who are under fire for what their critics call politically motivated zeal and an over-reliance on Mafia witnesses , whose credibility has eroded in recent years .
The Sicilian prosecutors failed to prove that Andreotti had reached a tacit `` pact of power '' with mob-connected politicians , turning a blind eye to organized crime in exchange for votes .
The most sensational allegation , that in 1987 Andreotti traveled secretly to Sicily to meet and exchange a ritual kiss with Salvatore `` the Beast '' Riina , a top Mafia boss who was then a fugitive and is now in jail , also did not hold up .
That charge was based on testimony given by Baldassare Di Maggio , a minor Sicilian mobster , who claimed he witnessed the embrace .
Di Maggio himself is now back in jail .
In the Mafia maxi-trials of the 1980s , `` pentiti '' helped prosecutors capture and convict hundreds of mobsters .
But the generous immunity deals many won in exchange for testifying led many critics to charge that Mafia witnesses would say whatever prosecutors wanted .
Witness -protection programs have proved lax .
Several mobsters , including Di Maggio , managed to kill rivals and commit other crimes while under the program .
Both magistrates and their critics agree the law needs to be changed .
Over the last six years , Andreotti , who was made a senator for life in 1991 , juggled his many court appearances with politics , interceding in parliamentary debates on NATO expansion and the European Union with his usual acerbic verve .
A slight , stooped man known for his erudition , his cynicism and his cunning , he skillfully brokered alliances that kept the popular Communist Party out of government throughout the Cold War .
A devoted Catholic who courted cardinals and popes , Andreotti never lost favor in the Vatican .
`` I repeat the satisfaction of the Holy See , which was already expressed over the acquittal in Perugia , '' Joaquin Navarro - Valls , the Vatican spokesman , said Saturday .
Andreotti 's critics have long portrayed him as a wily , sinister figure .
`` There has always been a theory , primarily on the left , that throughout the Cold War , Italy was ruled by two states -- a visible government , and an invisible power structure with shady connections to organized crime , secret services and the CIA , '' Romano explained .
`` Some people will go on believing it , but this verdict is a victory for Andreotti , and inevitably , a defeat for the other side . ''
