UNITED NATIONS --
Trafficking in people is now the fastest-growing business of organized crime , and it is being run by new , barely understood networks that have sidelined traditional criminal syndicates , the top anti-crime official at the United Nations said last week .
Pino Arlacchi , an Italian sociologist who worked closely on fighting the Mafia before becoming director general of the U.N. Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention three years ago , said in an interview Thursday that the tragic deaths last week of 58 Chinese migrants trying to reach Britain was `` just the tip of the iceberg , and one of several recent accidents that show the magnitude and seriousness of the problem . ''
He said reliable estimates indicate that 200 million people may now be in some way under the sway or in the hands of traffickers of various kinds worldwide .
He said that while four centuries of slavery moved about 11.5 million people out of Africa , in the last decade more than 30 million women and children may have been trafficked within and from Southeast Asia for sexual purposes and sweatshop labor .
Rates are also high in the countries of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union .
`` This is the fastest-growing criminal market in the world , because of the number of people who are involved , the scale of profits being generated for criminal organizations -- and because of its multifold nature , '' said Arlacchi , a U.N. undersecretary-general .
`` We do n't have just sexual exploitation .
We do n't have just economic slavery , which includes two things , forced labor and debt enslavement .
We have also a lot of exploitation of migrants .
And we have classic slavery .
`` If you put all this together under the same concept , you get the biggest violation of human rights in the world , '' he said .
Among the proposals he is making to governments is that anti-slavery laws be reintroduced where they have lapsed or been taken off the books .
He is also considering recommending temporary residence to would-be immigrants who cooperate with authorities in identifying criminals who are trafficking in people .
`` This a measure that in some countries , like Italy and Austria , is showing very important results in understanding the nature of networks -- how the victims are attracted , how they are recruited and the way they are exploited , '' Arlacchi said .
`` But first of all , we really have to understand the size of the phenomenon , '' Arlacchi said .
`` It is a sensitive political issue .
No country likes to admit to having sexual exploitation and human trafficking .
So we have to be very careful how we deal with the source countries . ''
In Europe , he said , large numbers of migrants are arriving from Africa , the former Soviet bloc , China , Southeast Asia and , lately , India .
Narcotics are still a bigger profit earner for organized crime than trafficking in people is , he said .
But the trade in human beings is growing quickly enough to demand more precise estimates of its value and better information about the links that the smuggling networks , strung along illegal migration routes , have with other types of international crime , he added .
In Europe , Arlacchi said , traffickers from Eastern Europe and Asia have already pushed crime gangs out of street prostitution in Western Europe .
The sexual slave trade was never acceptable to the Sicilian Mafia , Arlacchi said .
`` They are totally out of this business and they are losing ground vis-a-vis all other international competitors because of that . ''
Albanian and other Balkan criminal groups , known for their ferocity , dominate street trade in drugs and prostitutes .
`` The Albanians are particularly ferocious , '' he said .
`` In three or four years in the biggest Italian cities they have succeeded in destroying the competition of the other organizations .
Albanians scare the Sicilian Mafia . ''
Chinese migrants are not found often in the sex trade , Arlacchi said .
Like the migrants who died on the way to Britain and many who find their way to North America , he said , most Chinese are headed for restaurant or sweatshop work , and disappear into neighborhoods and businesses run by other Asians .
Compared with Italian or other European syndicates , he said , Chinese and other Asian networks are very closed , and therefore hard to penetrate .
`` The Chinese work very much inside closed communities , '' he said .
