WASHINGTON --
In a move that underlines the growing concern about Russian organized crime , the FBI is opening its first office abroad in which its agents will serve as full-time investigators .
The office is set to open next month in Budapest , which is home to many Russian mob leaders , who see the Hungarian capital as a well-situated portal to Western Europe and the United States .
`` This will be truly a working squad , '' said Thomas V. Fuentes , chief of the FBI 's organized-crime division .
`` They will develop and operate criminal informants .
They will gather intelligence .
There is no precedent for that . ''
The Hungarian government has requested help from the United States in breaking up the Russian gangs that operate from Budapest .
But by allowing the bureau to open a full-fledged office , Hungary has ceded more sovereignty than many other nations -- including the United States -- would ever consider , U.S. officials say .
FBI agents will have the right to carry weapons and , in conjunction with their Hungarian counterparts , to make arrests .
The FBI will also have the final say over the hiring and firing of the 10 Hungarian agents who will work in the office , alongside five U.S. agents .
The bureau has long had agents posted in U.S. embassies as legal attaches , which means they are semi-diplomats , acting as liaison officers with the local police or as trainers .
The bureau has also sent agents abroad temporarily to help foreign governments with major criminal investigations , as it did after the 1998 embassy bombings in Africa .
As a result of deepening contacts with law-enforcement officials in Hungary , the push to set up an FBI office in Budapest has come from the organized-crime section of the bureau and the U.S. Embassy in Hungary .
Along the way , officials have had to overcome the concerns of some at the State Department that an armed clash between FBI agents and criminals would create an international incident .
And many at the FBI are uncomfortable at the thought of armed agents thousands of miles from headquarters .
The Hungarians , too , remain wary about some of the details .
It was only last week that the Hungarians and Americans reached agreement on sharing criminal intelligence .
The Hungarians had balked , and remain nervous , because they fear that highly sensitive evidence gathered by criminal investigators about the Russian mobs could be made public in U.S. courts .
U.S. officials say that if the FBI office in Budapest succeeds , it could be a model for similar offices in other regions struggling against the penetration of Russian organized crime , including the Baltic states , Nigeria and South Africa .
One early target of the FBI 's Budapest office is expected to be Semyon Y. Mogilevich , a Russian citizen who has operated out of Budapest for a decade .
Recently he has been linked to the growing money-laundering investigation in the United States involving the Bank of New York .
U.S. investigators said that Mogilevich 's associates met with Peter Berlin , a central figure in the investigation , who recently surrendered to the FBI and pleaded guilty to money laundering .
Mogilevich is also the target of a separate money-laundering and financial-fraud investigation by the FBI in Philadelphia , according to federal officials and Mogilevich 's lawyer , who denied that his client had done anything illegal .
FBI reports say Mogilevich has engaged in trafficking of drugs , refugees and weapons , has run prostitution rings and has tortured and murdered his opponents .
`` Our objective is to strangle the Russian mafia that operates here , '' said the U.S. ambassador in Hungary , Peter Tufo , who has been an important and enthusiastic backer of the FBI 's war on the Russian mafia .
`` This is not a mom-and-pop operation , '' he said about the Russian mob , which has a global operation reaching from Moscow to Budapest to New York , Los Angeles and South Miami .
`` It 's a multibillion-dollar global enterprise . ''
Another major Russian crime group , the Solntsevskaya organization , has stepped up its operations out of Budapest , Tufo said .
The organization is headed by Sergei Mikhailov , according to European and U.S. law-enforcement officials .
Mikhailov , who lives in Moscow most of the time , was acquitted by a Swiss court last year of money-laundering charges , but that has not altered the view of U.S. law-enforcement officials that he is a person who needs to be stopped .
An FBI report in 1995 described the Solntsevskaya organization as the most powerful Eurasian organized-crime organization `` in the world in terms of wealth , influence and financial control . ''
Fuentes said the bureau is prepared for criticism from some quarters that the FBI should not be expanding abroad , that it should concentrate on combating crime at home .
His response is that the activities of the Russian mob are `` a direct threat to us , '' he said .
`` This is a measured response to a documented problem .
It is not a knee-jerk response , not a response to Bank of New York . ''
