TOKYO
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Japan 's Fishery Agency said Wednesday it will start its first research fishing for southern bluefin tuna in international waters after talks with Australia and New Zealand on catch quotas stalled .
The research program will begin Friday in the Indian Ocean , southwest of Australia , to confirm the tuna population , said agency spokesman Joji Morishita .
Japan has been banned from fishing in Australian waters since January , when talks broke down without setting catch quotas for this year for the tuna , highly prized in Japan for sashimi .
Australia and Japan were unable to reach agreement on scientific research on tuna populations .
Morishita said the research fishing is aimed at obtaining evidence to back Japan 's position that the tuna population is sufficient to allow larger fishing quotas .
Japan wants its quota increased by 3,000 metric tons from its limit last year of 6,065 metric tons .
Australia 's quota was 5,265 metric tons and New Zealand 's 420 metric tons .
The Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna , consisting of the three nations , annually allocates a total allowable catch and a fishing quota for each member country .
Australia and New Zealand sharply reacted to Japan 's announcement .
Australian Resources Minister Warwick Parer called in Japanese Ambassador Yukio Satoh and condemned Japan 's decision : `` Japan 's decision to go ahead with the experimental fishing program is shortsighted , and will reduce the chance that the southern bluefin tuna stock will recover from its present depleted state . ''
In Wellington , New Zealand 's Acting Foreign Minister Simon Upton and Fisheries Minister John Luxton said in a joint statement : `` We do not believe there are scientific benefits that would justify the further depletion caused by removals under Japan 's experimental fishing program .
The research fishing is to continue through Aug. 31 , with 65 boats planning to catch up to 1,400 tons of tuna , Morishita said .
After some of them are used for studies of their stomach contents , cells and muscles , they will be put on the market .
Although Japan is banned from Australian waters , it can take any size catch of tuna it wishes from other waters .
Australia and New Zealand maintain that the upcoming research fishing should be included in Japan 's quota for this year .
Reckless fishing practices in the late 1970s and early 1980s prompted the three nations to tighten fishing quotas in the mid-1980s .
