WELLINGTON , New Zealand
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
New Zealand on Monday banned Japanese bluefin tuna boats from entering its ports in an escalating row over Japanese plans to catch more of the threatened fish species .
Australia banned the 65-boat Japanese fleet from its ports and waters in January after three-nation talks over controlling southern bluefin tuna catch levels foundered .
Japan announced it will take an extra 1,400 tons of the prized tuna as part of what it is calling a `` experimental '' catching program to study the rapidly depleting stocks of the migratory fish .
Acting Foreign Minister Simon Upton , announcing the port ban , said the 65 vessels `` wo n't be welcome '' in New Zealand .
The ban will `` inconvenience those vessels '' but he expected they would provision in countries like South Africa and Indonesia .
`` Do n't ... assume that port closure is the end of this from New Zealand 's point of view .
It 's an initial response -LRB- only -RRB- , '' he said .
`` If we sign a convention -LRB- to control the bluefin tuna fishery -RRB- in good faith we expect the parties to abide by it and we 're not just going to walk away from the convention .
We need to see it work . ''
`` I think both Australia and New Zealand are quite clear that they 're not going to let this issue die , '' he added .
Both South Pacific states say the research catch should be part of Japan 's annual quota -- not additional to it .
Japan 's Fishery Agency began its research fishing for southern bluefin tuna in international waters last Friday after talks with Australia and New Zealand on catch quotas stalled earlier in the year at the Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna .
The research program began in the Indian Ocean , southwest of Australia , to confirm the tuna population , said agency spokesman Joji Morishita .
The research fishing is to continue through Aug. 31 , with some of the tuna to be used for studies of their stomach contents , cells and muscles .
They will then be put on the market .
The tuna , highly prized in Japan for sashimi , fetches up to U.S. dlrs 40 a pound -LRB- dlrs 100 a kilogram -RRB- on the Japanese market .
Morishita said the research fishing is aimed at obtaining evidence to back Japan 's position that the tuna population is sufficient to allow larger fishing quotas .
Japan wants its quota increased by 3,000 metric tons from its limit last year of 6,065 metric tons .
Australia 's quota was 5,265 metric tons and New Zealand 's 420 metric tons .
South Korean , Taiwanese and Indonesian vessels also catch the tuna , and their estimated 6,000-ton a year take is extra to the annual quota under the three-nation convention .
