SYDNEY , Australia
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Japanese fishermen are registering their ships in foreign countries to circumvent an international treaty and fish for an endangered species of tuna , the environmental group Greenpeace said Wednesday .
Greenpeace called on the Australian government to bring Japan before the International Court of Justice for alleged breaches of the Convention on the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna .
`` Japan has been devious and underhanded by disguising its own fishing vessels by registering them in other countries , '' said Greenpeace spokesman Darren Gladman .
He did not specify which countries were being used by Japanese fishermen .
But he said the extra fishing was wiping out already depleted stocks .
`` While politicians waste time , this fish is being driven to extinction , '' Gladman said .
Morio Kaneko , an official at the Fisheries Agency in Tokyo , said Japan cautioned the Australian government earlier this year that a Japanese fishing boat had registered in Honduras and that it was trying to register in Australia .
But the Australian government later approved the registration of the boat , the Koala No .
1 .
`` There are no other similar cases reported at present , '' Kaneko said .
Australia , New Zealand and Japan are parties to the convention , which provides that fishing only be conducted with the consent of all parties .
Japan has already exceeded its catch of Southern Bluefin Tuna under the convention , saying the additional catch was experimental and would help assess tuna stocks .
The Australian government earlier this month sent Japan a diplomatic note to say that it believed its experimental fishing program was in violation of international law .
Greenpeace said the World Conservation Union has declared the Southern Bluefin Tuna a critically endangered species and Australian scientists predict that at current fishing rates , there is a greater than 60 percent likelihood that the adult population will be reduced to zero by 2020 .
`` Fish stocks are being poached from right under our nose .
Japan continues to break the law and Australia must take decisive action , '' Gladman said .
