BRUSSELS , Belgium
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
European Union fisheries ministers on Friday agreed on new catch quotas for 1999 following all-night negotiations , carefully walking a tightrope between the demands of their fishermen and the need to protect dwindling stocks .
Many of the EU 's executive Commission demands for sizable cuts in the quotas to protect stocks were taken into account but the powerful fisheries nations were also able to soften the blow for their fishermen in several sectors .
The brokering between the conservation and economic issues produced `` a reasonable and responsible balance , '' said Lord Sewel , Scottish Office minister .
The 15 fisheries ministers reached unanimous agreement on about 100 different quotas for various types of fish in waters around the EU. Only Italy abstained when ministers voted early Friday .
Overall , no catch decreased by more than 40 percent and most were well within that limit .
Some catches of saithe were cut by 31 percent , North Sea whiting by 27 percent , and North Sea haddock by 23 percent .
Fishermen though also realized some cuts were tough but necessary .
`` This was a successful exercise , against a background of very extreme proposals , '' Barrie Deas , chief executive of the National Federation of Fishermen 's Organizations , said .
`` The problem is to balance the long-term sustainability of the stocks with the short-term viability of the fishing industry , '' he added .
The ministers also dealt with the controversial issue of setting new quotas for bluefin tuna , one of the world 's most expensive fishes , in the Mediterranean and the Atlantic .
The bluefin is a delicacy for exclusive sushi tables in Japan and represents some dlrs 250 million in trade , considering one ton easily sells at dlrs 15,000 .
Greece and Italy had overfished their share of bluefin tuna in 1997 but wanted to share the penalty burden with the other nations fishing for bluefin .
France , Spain and Portugal , the other fleets involved , refused to go beyond a compromise proposal by the EU commission and the new quotas had to be approved by a qualified majority vote , with Italy and Greece voting against .
Because of years of overfishing , the fish has become ever rarer , and the 15-nation EU has seen its catch quota decline to 20,165 tons in 1999 compared to 28,108 tons this year .
In addition , the international ICCAT organization that sets the tuna quotas , had penalized the EU an additional 4,029 tons for the overfishing in 1997 .
