SYDNEY , Australia
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Japan is likely to seek an increase in its catch quota for Southern Bluefin Tuna based on the results of its experimental fishing program , but Australia said Friday the program is fundamentally flawed .
Japan on Wednesday announced it fished a total of 1,363 metric tons of tuna in its experimental fishing program , conducted in the Indian Ocean between July 10 and Aug. 31 .
The program , aimed at investigating tuna stocks in waters where tuna boats do not usually operate , was carried out despite criticisms by Australia and New Zealand , the two other members of the Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna .
`` The catch per operation in the experimental fishing program was at an average of 76 percent of regular operations , verifying Japan 's hypothesis that tuna stocks are recovering , '' an official at Japan 's Fisheries Agency said .
`` And we hope to add this scientific proof to our claims at the negotiation table , '' the official said .
The data will be analyzed by a group of Japanese scientists before the end of the year , and will be offered to Australia and New Zealand if they request it .
However , a spokesman for Resources Minister Senator Warwick Parer said the result was scientifically useless .
`` Australia has consistently warned that the design of the experimental fishing program is flawed , and we have always said that because of the design problem , it will invariably generate a result that shows there are more fish out there than our scientists believe .
`` So it is no surprise to us at all that the program produced such results , '' the spokesman said .
However , Parer office welcomed Japan 's move to crack down on Flag of Convenience tuna vessels as `` a big positive step . ''
Flag of Convenience vessels , not operating under the flag of countries that have regional fisheries pacts in waters they trawl , are creating loopholes in fishing quota agreements .
Non -commissioned catches of tuna around Australia by such ships have risen rapidly and are now estimated at around 5,000 tons annually .
The total annual quota for the three member countries of the Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna is 11,750 tons .
Some Japanese industry sources say 2,000 to 3,000 tons of Southern Bluefin Tuna caught by Flag of Convenience vessels are shipped to Japan every year .
The Japanese government is currently preparing legal action that would prevent Japanese fishermen from serving on Flag of Convenience vessels .
It is also attempting to prevent imports of fish caught by such vessels .
Negotiations over setting the quota for tuna fishing will continue between Japan , Australia and New Zealand after the Oct. 3 Australian election .
pjs
