ROME
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Faced with depleting fish stocks and alarmed by the potential damage to their economies , more than 80 nations on Tuesday approved a voluntary agreement to limit fishing worldwide .
Under the accord , nations also pledged to protect sharks and seabirds .
Each year , thousands of sharks are accidentally caught in nets used by tuna fishermen while thousands of seabirds die when they try to feed off bait on fishing lines and become ensnared by the hooks .
The document was adopted at a weeklong conference at the Rome -based Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and has been submitted to the agency 's fishing committee for final approval , expected in February .
`` In most cases , the greatest risk is not the extinction of fish species but the extinction of economies , '' said Serge Garcia , director of FAO 's Fisheries Resources Division .
The world ocean catch is valued at about dlrs 80 billion a year , and fish farming adds another dlrs 42 billion .
Fisheries employ about 200 million people worldwide .
Garcia said that too many fish are being caught every year , preventing many species from reaching reproduction age and causing the number of fish in the ocean to drop .
He estimated that an additional 10 million tons of fish could be caught each year if stocks were allowed to regenerate .
`` If we reduce our fishing capacity , the fish will be bigger and there will be more of them , '' said Garcia .
He said governments needed to restrict fishing licenses and encourage the retirement of vessels , two key recommendations in the accord .
China , Russia , Japan , the United States and India lead the world in fishing tonnage , according to 1995 figures .
Backers of the accord said it won the approval of all the key fishing nations , including the United States .
What has happened with cod in Canada is a prime example of overfishing , said Garcia .
There , the average life of cod , which is 20 years when they are undisturbed , has dropped to just 3 , far below the age when they can start spawning .
Species most at risk of further depletion include Atlantic cod and redfish , haddock , anchovy , swordfish and tunas such as bluefin , bigeye and albacore .
FAO said that an increased trade in shark fins and other exotic shark products in recent years has critically endangered several species .
The accord asks nations to adopt protective measures including special nets with holes for sharks to escape .
It also calls on fishermen who accidentally catch sharks to put them back in the ocean alive and withdraw any hooks from their jaws .
