BRUSSELS , Belgium
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
European Union fisheries ministers opened negotiations Thursday to set catch quotas for next year , trying to find a balance between the demands of their fishermen and the need to protect dwindling stocks .
Proposals from the EU 's executive Commission for sizable cuts in the quotas diverge greatly from demands for increases from major fishing nations .
The differences led to an almost immediate suspension of the full meeting to allow for a series of bilateral sessions .
EU officials said the ministers were far from agreement as they assessed about 100 different quotas for various types of fish in waters around the EU .
The ministers are set for a particularly bitter fight over which fleets will be able to catch dwindling quotas of bluefin tuna in the Mediterranean and sell them to Japan where they are a high-priced delicacy for exclusive sushi tables .
Quota proposals for other fish also reflect dwindling stocks in Mediterranean , Baltic and Atlantic waters .
Commission offers for total allowable catches include cuts of up to 47 percent in whiting , 40 percent in saithe and 30 percent in haddock in certain waters .
Commission officials said the cuts were based on scientific evidence showing significant declines of stocks .
Yet during the negotiating sessions EU member states are expected to take the hard edges off the Commission 's proposals .
Spain , France and Ireland are all asking for increases in catch quotas for certain fish where the Commission is seeking cuts .
Negotiations will be especially tough on divvying up the quota for bluefin tuna , one of the world 's most expensive fish .
Under international agreements , the quota for the EU as a whole represents about dlrs 250 million .
That has to be shared between Greece , Italy , Spain , France and Portugal .
Bluefin tuna is one of the most sought-after fish for sushi and sashimi .
On the Tokyo fish market , prices can easily reach dlrs 15,000 a ton .
Before of Japan 's financial crisis , prices were double .
Because of years of overfishing , the fish has become ever rarer , and the 15-nation EU has seen its catch quota decline to 20,165 tons in 1999 compared to 28,108 tons this year .
In addition , the international ICCAT organization that sets the tuna quotas , has penalized the EU an additional 4,029 tons for overfishing in 1997 .
Greece and Italy overfished their share of bluefin tuna in 1997 but they are calling on EU partners to share the penalty burden .
Under the EU 's executive Commission proposals , Greece would lose 54 percent of its quota , even though its overfishing exceeded that and Italy , which overfished its quota by about 30 percent would lose 16 percent .
