Fishermen who have long cherished free access to marine resources may soon have to come to terms with the privatization of some of the ocean 's fish stocks .
According to the National Academy of Science , the best way to conserve some fisheries may be to give a limited number of fishermen and boat owners exclusive rights to the harvest .
Last June , the Academy 's National Research Council released a report titled `` Sharing the Fish , '' which recommended that Congress lift its 4-year -old moratorium on the use of Individual Fishing Quotas -- or IFQs -- as a management tool .
The controversial quota systems allocate guaranteed shares of a total allowable catch to fishermen , or boat owners , within a specified fishery .
The shares , usually based on a fishing operation 's past landings , are often transferable -- and are hence also referred to as Individual Transferable Quotas or ITQs .
Among fishermen , the two terms are used almost interchangeably .
For regulators , individual quotas provide a simple mechanism to help them keep fisheries landings within conservation guidelines , and leave heated allocation issues to the market , assuming that more profitable fishing operations will buy quota from less efficient ones .
In the view of the academy 's report , the ensuing consolidation of quota shares is desirable , and will serve the national interest by providing a better net return on fishing investments .
While individual quotas are intended to promote stewardship of the resource by giving shareholders a long-term stake in the fishery , critics argue that quota systems give what is left of troubled fisheries to the people most responsible for depleting them , and squeeze out low-impact user groups .
`` Recreational fishermen are generally against any management that privatizes a public resource , '' said Andy Mezirow , who runs a halibut charter boat out of Seward , Alaska .
In the Northeast , `` commercial fishermen are strongly opposed to ITQs , '' said Tom Hill , chairman of the New England Fisheries Management Council .
Hill believes that the IFQ moratorium will be lifted during the forthcoming congressional reauthorization of the Magnuson Stevens Fisheries Conservation Act .
He notes , however , that `` IFQs raise some interesting philosophical questions about people 's access to public resources , and those issues are going to have to be wrestled with as we form a policy . ''
Proponents say the quotas are just another option for fisheries managers .
`` IFQs can be a useful tool , '' said Ed Urban , chairman of the committee that wrote `` Sharing the Fish . ''
Urban points out the IFQ program set up in 1995 , for the Alaskan halibut fishery , as an exemplary case .
Before the switch to quotas , the Alaskan halibut fishery was a `` derby '' in which participants caught as many fish as they could during seasons as short as three days .
The resulting glut of fish on the market led to poor prices , and the race for fish often kept fishermen working in dangerous weather .
Since the introduction of the IFQ program , halibut stocks have increased , and fishermen have been able to play the market , as well as the weather .
`` They have a more profitable , and safer , fishery now , '' Urban said .
But Mezirow is not happy with the much-touted halibut program , which , in his area , has reduced sport fishermen 's percentage of the annual halibut landings by 15 percent .
`` If there is not a shortage of fish , then the public should have a fair share of them , '' Mezirow said .
`` Quota shareholders feel like they own their shares , and anybody else catching halibut is taking from them . ''
The academy recommended integrating recreational and commercial sectors in individual quota programs , but Bob Zales , president of the National Association of Charterboat Operators , sees individual quotas as a threat to the recreational fishing industry .
`` You cannot manage a recreational fishery on fixed quotas , '' Zales said .
`` It ends up being too much hassle , and people go do something else . ''
On the other hand Zales points out that some commercial fishermen , advocating individual quotas for the red snapper fishery in the South , may get more than they are bargaining for .
`` These quotas could go to the highest bidder , and recreational fishermen can pay a lot more , '' Zales said .
`` What commercial fishermen think is the cure-all could be the end-all . ''
Greenpeace also believes that the benefits of the quotas come at a high cost .
The environmental organization commissioned an independent study of IFQs , and released its own report , `` Scaring the Fish , '' last December .
`` The academy 's report is a promotion piece for IFQs , '' said Gerry Leape of the Greenpeace Oceans Campaign .
`` We wanted to get an alternative view out before the upcoming legislative session .
Congress may decide IFQs are necessary but they need the whole story . ''
Using evidence from Iceland , where IFQs have been in use since 1984 , the Greenpeace document supports the contention that consolidation of the resource in the hands of a few highly capitalized operations is devastating to traditional fishing communities .
The transfer of quota out of small communities in his country has led to what a University of Iceland anthropologist , Gisli Palsson , calls `` a national identity crisis . ''
`` Icelanders tend to pride themselves in a close relationship with the sea , '' Palsson said .
`` With ITQs , this relationship is shattered .
There are no more ` communal ' fishing grounds , and some communities are on the verge of bankruptcy due to loss of quota . ''
Individual quotas have also been a hard sell to most commercial fishermen in New England and the mid- Atlantic states , where the tradition of free access to the marine resources is deeply entrenched .
Nonetheless , some fisheries in the region , such as bluefin tuna , are likely candidates for individual quota systems .
In the bluefin tuna fishery , harvesters race for a limited amount of fish during short openings .
They glut the market , and push the limits of their boats in foul weather -- problems similar to those resolved by IFQs in the Alaskan halibut fishery .
But few fishermen want to see fishing rights become private property , and although the academy 's report defines IFQs as simply an `` individual 's privilege to harvest fish , '' in order to attract investment , that privilege needs to be stable .
Ed Urban acknowledges that `` quota shares could tend to take on some aspects of property , '' and he sees the problems that shifting large slices of the fisheries ' pie would pose for traditional fishing communities .
But Urban believes his committee 's report is objective , and that it makes reasonable recommendations to deal fairly with the issues of property and community access .
`` Each program appears to have gotten better at dealing with these problems , '' Urban said .
`` In Alaska there are limits on how much quota a single shareholder can own , and we 've made recommendations that communities be able to hold quota . ''
Under any IFQ scheme , however , conservation will come at cost to some sectors of the fishing industry , raising philosophical questions about public access to marine resources .
