John Sorlien , a lean , sunburned fisherman in rubber overalls , was loading his boat along the wharf at Point Judith , R.I. , not far from the spot where the `` Tuna Capital of the World '' sign stood three decades ago .
Back then , you could harpoon giant bluefins right outside the harbor .
Today , you would have a hard time finding one within 20 miles .
Since the early 1970s , the tuna have declined -- along with cod , swordfish , halibut and so many other species in the ruined fisheries of the Northeast .
Sorlien , like the other fishermen in this harbor just west of Newport , is surviving thanks to New England 's great cash crop , lobsters , but he wonders how much longer they 'll be around .
`` Right now , my only incentive is to go out and kill as many fish as I can , '' Sorlien said .
`` I have no incentive to conserve the fishery , because any fish I leave is just going to be picked by the next guy . ''
Like the men who wiped out the buffaloes on the Great Plains in the 19th century , Sorlien is a hunter-gatherer who has become too lethal for his range .
He is what 's known in the business as a highliner -- a fisherman who comes back with big hauls -- but every season the competition gets tougher .
When he got started 16 years ago , at the age of 22 , he used a small boat and set traps within three miles of shore .
These days , he does n't even bother looking in those waters , which fishermen now refer to as `` on the beach . ''
He has graduated to a 42-foot boat and often goes 70 miles out to sea for lobsters , which can mean leaving the dock at midnight and not returning until 10 the following night .
Each year , he has had to go farther and haul more traps just to stay even .
Solien was starting the season on this May morning by loading hundreds of the traps onto his boat , the Cindy Diane .
The four-foot-long steel cages , each baited with a dangling skate fish , would spend the next eight months at sea .
Sorlien would be tending 800 of them in all .
On a typical day , he would haul 300 , sometimes 400 , up from the ocean floor to remove lobsters and insert fresh bait .
As he stacked one 40-pound trap after another on deck , it was easy to see why he and so many other lobstermen have back problems .
`` My chiropractor says he can always tell when it 's lobster season , '' Sorlien said .
The chiropractor is treating the consequence of what fishery scientists call `` effort creep . ''
Over the years , as Sorlien got a bigger boat and gradually doubled the number of his traps in the water , other lobstermen were doing the same .
It was an arms race with no winners and some definite losers : the lobsters .
Their life expectancy plummeted .
`` Lobsters used to live for 50 or 75 years , '' recalled Robert Smith , who has been lobstering at Point Judith since 1948 .
`` When I started , it was not unusual to get a 30-pound lobster .
It 's been 20 years since I got one that was even 20 pounds . ''
Last year , the biggest one he caught was four pounds , and that was an anomaly .
Most lobsters do n't even make it to two pounds .
Biologists estimate that 90 percent of lobsters are caught within a year after they reach the legal minimum size at about age 6 .
The obvious remedy would be to restrict the amount of fishing going on , as lobstermen have traditionally done in some communities .
They have created informal local groups -- called harbor gangs by anthropologists -- in which they divvy up the nearby seabed , determining who can fish where , how long the season will be and how many traps each man can use .
The harbor gangs are built around the management principles of Tony Soprano .
If a fishing trawler drags a net through their waters , destroying their traps , the lobstermen may dump an old car onto the seabed , which will rip the trawler 's net the next time it 's dragged .
If an outside lobsterman intrudes , he might find that someone has removed his lobsters and left the traps conspicuously open or maybe applied a chain saw to the steel cages .
If he does n't take the hint , his boat might be burned or sunk .
But the tactics generally work only in waters close to the gang 's home .
The open ocean is harder to defend .
Most stretches of open ocean are governed by state and federal governments , which is why the fish are in so much trouble .
Tuna do not vote .
Lobsters do not make campaign contributions .
There may be future benefits from limiting this year 's catch , but politicians do n't want the fishing industry to suffer while they 're up for re-election .
Even when fish populations start to decline , officials are reluctant to impose strict limits .
Instead , they have often tried to help struggling fishermen with subsidies , which merely encourage more overfishing .
The Canadian and American governments devastated one of the world 's most productive fisheries , the Georges Banks off the coast of New England , by helping to pay for bigger boats .
Now , even as scientists urge limits on lobstering , state and federal governments continue to offer tax breaks and other incentives to the lobstermen at Point Judith .
Richard Allen , a member of the Rhode Island Lobsterman 's Association , has been lobstering for nearly 30 years and preaching reform for a decade .
He journeyed to a port in Australia and returned with stories of a place with thriving lobsters , plenty of fat tuna , lots of prosperous fishermen -- and no Soprano strong-arm tactics .
It sounded like the maritime version of the Happy Hunting Grounds .
Fishing has been very good to Port Lincoln , a little fishing town on a remote peninsula of Australia 's southern coast .
The fishermen have gleaming $ 600,000 boats in a pristine private marina flanked by new white stucco town houses .
Compared with the decaying public wharfs in Point Judith , Port Lincoln feels like Palm Beach .
The town 's 13,000 inhabitants are said to include the highest number of millionaires per capita in the southern hemisphere .
That , at least , is a factoid you keep hearing there .
Lobstering is an excellent job here thanks to a system of quotas that was pioneered in Australia and New Zealand .
It is basically a version of the New England harbor gangs , run by the lobstermen under government supervision .
The government started it in the 1960s by setting a limit on the total number of traps used by the fleet in Port Lincoln .
Licenses for those traps were assigned to the working fishermen , and from then on , any newcomer who wanted to set a trap in those waters had to buy a license from someone already in the business .
It 's like New York 's taxicab system , which has a fixed number of taxi licenses or `` medallions '' : A newcomer who wants to own a cab must buy a medallion from someone who is retiring .
One lobsterman , Daryl Spencer , bought his first trap licenses in 1984 for $ 2,000 apiece in Australian dollars .
Nowadays , they would sell for $ 35,000 , which means that Spencer 's are worth a total of $ 2.1 million , or about $ 1.2 million in American dollars .
The Australians are not any more altruistic than the Rhode Islanders -- they too have mortgages to pay -- and in the old days they used to howl when anyone suggested reducing their catch .
But they began taking the long view as soon as they saw the rising price of their licenses for their lobster pots , as they call the traps .
Like any property owner , they began thinking about resale value .
`` Why hurt the fishery ? ''
Spencer said .
`` It 's my retirement fund .
No one 's going to pay me $ 35,000 a pot if there are no lobsters left .
If I rape and pillage the fishery now , in 10 years my licenses wo n't be worth anything . ''
Besides building up nest eggs , Port Lincoln 's lobstermen have made their own jobs easier .
While Rhode Island lobstermen are sometimes on the water 240 days per year , the Australians are not allowed to work more than 187 days of their 211-day season .
And their days are a lot easier on the back , as a young lobsterman , Hubert Hurrell , demonstrated one March morning in his appropriately named boat , Fine Time .
Hurrell and I left the dock at 7 : 30 a.m. and sped out to his traps in barely an hour , cruising at 22 knots in his 60-foot boat .
The wheelhouse and staterooms had the space and amenities you expect to find on yachts , not lobster boats .
There was a television and VCR , a video-game player and a wraparound console with six screens showing data from computers , instruments and satellites .
Hurrell shook his head and winced when he heard about the 800 traps tended by the typical lobsterman in Rhode Island .
In Port Lincoln , the lobstermen have limited themselves to 60 traps each .
It took Hurrell and his deckhand just an hour to raise their 60 traps and to extract an assortment of lobsters , including some hefty long-lived ones .
After a leisurely lunch , they dropped the traps back into the water and were back on shore by 3 .
It was not quite an eight-hour day , and Hurrell was satisfied with the financial results .
`` No worries , mate , '' he said , which was not a bad summary of the prevailing view among the scientists who study the lobsters .
`` Fishing may be the only economic activity in which you can make more money by doing less work , '' said Rick McGarvey , a biologist who monitors the fishery for the South Australian government .
`` By fishing less , the fishermen leave more lobsters out there to produce more eggs , which will make it easier for them to catch lobsters in the future .
It 's a win-win for the fish and the fishermen .
The lobsters are thriving and the fishermen are spending more time at home with their families . ''
The system also makes McGarvey 's job easier because he is spared the controversies that American scientists endure when they try to protect a fishery .
In New England , a proposed conservation measure typically inspires a decade of battling that leads , at best , to an ineffectual compromise .
In South Australia , the lobstermen act quickly to prevent overfishing , sometimes imposing stricter limits than the ones suggested by scientists .
`` We do n't have to fight with the lobstermen , '' McGarvey said .
`` The old philosophy of fishery scientists was , ` We 're philosopher kings and the fishermen are children who do n't know what 's good for themselves or the fish , so we have to impose regulations . '
Now we just tell them what our research shows about the fishery , and they do a great job of regulating themselves . ''
Other researchers have documented similar success stories around the world , including many from traditional societies that have used property rights to protect the environment .
In the South Pacific , where coral reefs have been destroyed by fishermen using dynamite and cyanide , the best-preserved reefs are the ones controlled by local villagers and closed off to outsiders .
Japanese fishing villages have long prevented overfishing in local waters by using versions of harbor gangs .
Louisiana 's privately leased oyster beds are much healthier than the public ones in Mississippi .
These results have won over most academic experts on fisheries .
Last year , Australian -style quotas were endorsed in a report to Congress by the National Research Council , an arm of the National Academy of Sciences .
Property rights enable fishermen to avoid what ecologists call the tragedy of the commons : the destruction of a common resource because it is open to all .
Just as the closely tended herds of cattle thrived on the same plains where the buffaloes perished , fish stand a better chance of surviving if they belong to someone instead of everyone .
But there are , of course , a few political problems in persuading hunter-gatherers to become homesteaders .
The biggest is how to divide up the range .
Do you allocate the quotas and licenses equally among all working fishermen or according to how many fish each has been catching ?
Do you calculate each one 's catch by considering the past year or the past 10 years ?
Do locals get first dibs on fishing rights ?
In the mid-1990s , the U.S. government successfully introduced Australia -style quotas in a few fisheries .
But then Alaska 's politicians got worried that fishermen from Seattle would end up with most of the quotas in their waters , so in 1996 they persuaded Congress to declare a national moratorium on any new quotas .
The moratorium could end soon , which gives hope to Richard Allen , the Rhode Island lobsterman who has been preaching the Port Lincoln gospel .
`` Most people start with the feeling that the ocean should be open to anyone who wants to fish , '' Allen said .
`` They complain that it 's unfair to lock anyone out of the fishery .
My answer is that with the current system , we already have fisheries that we 're all locked out of .
I ca n't go out and fish for halibut or swordfish -- there are n't any left .
I would rather have a healthy fish stock and the option to buy access to it . ''
Allen has been gradually winning converts on the wharfs in Point Judith , but it has n't been easy .
`` We 're our own worst enemy , '' Sorlien said .
`` We 're like the cattlemen in the range wars who shot at each other because they were claiming the right to the same property .
Somewhere along the line , they figured out it made more sense to divide up the land and set up a system of property rights .
That 's the rational solution for us , but we ca n't bring ourselves to go through the pain of allocating each person a share .
We 're so far away from being South Australia . ''
`` Imagine that -- just 60 traps , '' Sorlien said .
He had been working for six hours , since 5 : 30 a.m. , and the workday was n't even half over .
`` You 'd be done for the day now .
You could be home counting your money , and you would n't have to worry about where the next lobster was coming from . ''
-LRB- John Tierney writes the Big City column for the Metro section of The New York Times . -RRB-
-- EDITORS : Visit The New York Times Syndicate Web site at http : //www.nytimes.com/syndicate for more information on CENTERPIECE and other features .
NONSUBSCRIBERS : To publish a `` separate-buy '' feature article , it must be purchased .
Please contact one of these sales representatives : --U.S .
and Canada : DEBRA WEYDERT in New Jersey at 1-732-390-4480 ; fax , 732-390-4697 .
--Europe and Asia : KARL HORWITZ in Paris at 47-42-17-11 ; fax , 47-42-80-44 or 47-42-18-81 ; telex , 282-942 .
--Latin America : ANA PENA in New York , 212-499-3333 ; fax , 212-499-3382 .
