ANKARA , Turkey
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Shuttling between the Turkish and Syrian capitals , Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak tried Tuesday to avert a feared war between the two countries over Kurdish rebels .
In three hours of closed-door talks with Mubarak , Turkish President Suleyman Demirel upheld his nation 's case that Syria is sheltering Turkish Kurd rebels responsible for cross-border attacks .
Turkey is threatening force against Syria , which denies harboring the rebels .
`` The Turkish side has explained the support extended by Syria to the terrorist activities in detail and said that this cannot go on .
It has been stated that the Turkish public is outraged and pointed out to solid steps that have to be taken by Syria , '' Demirel said in a statement after the talks .
Independent television NTV said Mubarak left Ankara with six Turkish demands for Syria : Cease support to the rebels , expel rebel leader Abdullah Ocalan , close rebel camps in Syrian -controlled Lebanon , stop rebel trips across the border , recognize Turkey 's existing borders and promise to establish good , neighborly relations .
The statement from Demirel 's office said the Egyptians were given a dossier -- apparently , one containing intelligence reports that Turkey believes confirm Syrian backing for the rebels .
`` We are warning Syria for the last time to cease its support to the separatist organization and abandon its hostile policy against Turkey , '' Prime Minister Mesut Yilmaz told Parliament on Tuesday .
Mubarak flew from the Turkish capital to Damascus late Tuesday and went directly into talks with Syrian President Hafez Assad .
Neither leader talked with reporters before the meeting , their second in three days on the crisis .
Mubarak told Egyptian journalists on his plane that he has proposed that Turkey and Syria `` meet to discuss the details of the problem '' over the Kurdish rebels , Egypt 's Middle East News Agency reported .
Mubarak acknowledged Demirel 's concern about the rebels , but added : `` I pointed out to him that our region does not accept or endure any military action or armed confrontation . ''
MENA also said Mubarak was trying to arrange a meeting between the Turkish and Syrian foreign ministers as well as creation of a `` joint committee to start meeting to rebuild the bridges of confidence '' between the neighboring countries .
Turkey initially , 8th graf pvs
