ANKARA , Turkey
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Shuttling between Ankara and Damascus , Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak tried Tuesday to avert a feared war between Turkey and Syria over Kurdish rebels .
In three hours of closed-door talks with Mubarak , Turkish President Suleyman Demirel upheld his nation 's case that Syria is sheltering Turkish Kurd rebels responsible for cross-border attacks .
Turkey is threatening force against Syria , which denies harboring the rebels .
`` The Turkish side has explained the support extended by Syria to the terrorist activities in detail and said that this cannot go on .
It has been stated that the Turkish public is outraged and pointed out to solid steps that have to be taken by Syria , '' Demirel said in a statement after the talks .
Independent television NTV said Mubarak left Ankara with six Turkish demands for Syria : Cease support to the rebels , expel rebel leader Abdullah Ocalan , close rebel camps in Syrian -controlled Lebanon , stop rebel trips across the border , recognize Turkey 's existing borders and promise to establish good , neighborly relations .
The statement from Demirel 's office said the Egyptians were given a dossier -- apparently , one containing intelligence reports that Turkey believes confirm Syrian backing for the rebels .
`` We are warning Syria for the last time to cease its support to the separatist organization and abandon its hostile policy against Turkey , '' Premier Mesut Yilmaz told Parliament on Tuesday .
Mubarak flew from the Turkish capital to Damascus late Tuesday and met for more than an hour with Syrian President Hafez Assad .
It was their second meeting in three days .
Assad 's spokesman , Jubran Kourieh , did not give details , saying only that Mubarak outlined Ankara 's views and listened to Syria 's .
Reports in Egypt said Mubarak was trying to work out a mechanism for the two sides to resolve the dispute peacefully .
Mubarak told Egyptian journalists on his plane that he proposed that Turkey and Syria `` meet to discuss the details of the problem '' over the Kurdish rebels , Egypt 's Middle East News Agency reported .
Mubarak acknowledged Demirel 's concern about the rebels , but added : `` I pointed out to him that our region does not accept or endure any military action or armed confrontation . ''
MENA also said Mubarak was trying to arrange a meeting between the Turkish and Syrian foreign ministers as well as creation of a `` joint committee to start meeting to rebuild the bridges of confidence '' between the neighboring countries .
Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi weighed in on Syria 's side Tuesday , saying `` any aggression against Syria will be considered as an aggression against Libya according to the Arab joint defense pact . ''
Turkey stressed in a presidential statement Tuesday that the issue was not linked to Turkish - Arab relations .
The United States and Russia , along with most countries of the Middle East , urged the two countries to reach a peaceful solution .
Relations between Turkey and Syria have long been troublesome .
Damascus is uneasy with Ankara 's plans to build dams on the Euphrates River , a key source of water for Syria , while Turkey accuses Damascus of having designs on a Turkish border province , Hatay , which has a sizable Arab population .
Syria also feels threatened by the military and diplomatic ties between Turkey and Israel .
But the recent rise in tension appears part of Ankara 's push to end fighting in a 14-year -old Kurdish insurgency in which 37,000 people have died .
The rebels are fighting for Kurdish autonomy in southeast Turkey .
Turkey has reportedly sent 10,000 troops to its border with Syria .
Newspapers have suggested that its forces could stage raids on rebel camps in the Syrian -controlled Bekaa Valley in Lebanon .
There have been unconfirmed reports of Turkish jets buzzing the border area in a show of force .
