WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Syria , Libya and some other nations aggressively strive to make their own weapons of mass destruction , but their progress has been slowed by tight export controls and their own inability to fully develop chemical , nuclear or biological arms , according to a new CIA report .
While the Chinese theft of nuclear secrets from the United States and worries about proliferation from China have been the recent focus of such concerns , the CIA points to Russia as the primary supplier of mass destruction weapons and materials , because of unreliable export controls .
The CIA 's twice-yearly report on developments in proliferation of weapons of mass destruction -- this one covering the second half of last year -- was submitted to Congress Thursday and made available Friday after it was declassified .
North Korea is also aggressively exporting missile technology as a key source of hard currency for its strapped economy .
But North Korea 's overall weapons capabilities are far less than those of Russia and China .
And Iraq appears to be providing some technical assistance , though no actual materials , to Sudan .
Countries `` of concern '' to the United States that are seeking these weapons include Iran , Iraq , North Korea , Libya , Syria and Sudan .
Egypt is also seeking to buy technology for improved missiles .
And India and Pakistan continue to try to improve their nuclear weapons programs .
But all of these countries , according to the CIA , depend heavily on outside suppliers .
`` Outside assistance is critical to keeping -LRB- Libya 's -RRB- ballistic missile development programs from becoming moribund , '' the CIA reported .
For Syria , `` Foreign equipment and assistance have been and will continue to be essential '' to a solid-fuel rocket program .
India and Pakistan were able to obtain `` only a limited amount '' of nuclear weapons-related assistance during the second half of 1998 , just after the two longtime enemies rattled the world with a series of underground nuclear test explosions .
Throughout the report , the emphasis appeared to be on the difficulty these countries have had in getting around export controls being imposed in China and Russia , the countries the CIA identifies as the main sources of mass destruction weapons technology .
The CIA 's overall assessment is that China is tightening control on export of weapons technology by a growing number of quasi-independent development and manufacturing `` entities '' that have been difficult to police in recent years .
The report indicates China is sticking to its export control pledges .
`` The effectiveness , however , of China 's nascent nuclear export controls is not yet clear ; restructuring among oversight entities and the defense industries may impede implementation in the near term , '' the CIA reported .
In Russia , the report cited some `` positive steps '' toward weapons export control taken by Moscow under `` intense and continuing engagement '' with the Clinton administration , including decrees broadening the list of items banned for export and increasing government control of Russian companies that make these items .
`` Despite these decrees , the government 's commitment , willingness and ability to curb proliferation-related transfers remain uncertain , '' the CIA reported .
`` Moreover , economic conditions in Russia continued to deteriorate , putting more pressure on Russian entities to circumvent export controls . ''
The report indicates that economics , rather than some grander ideological plan , lies behind much of the world 's weapons proliferation , with Russia and North Korea grappling with troubled or failing economies and Iraq hemmed in by embargoes .
Because of the improvements being made in export controls , the CIA reports , would-be developers of mass destruction arsenals are focusing their efforts on buying so-called dual use equipment -- civilian nuclear reactors for Iran , chemical production equipment for Iraq -- that could be converted to weapons production .
