ISTANBUL , Turkey --
Turkey has been without a functioning government for 40 days , and no one knows whether there will be an election soon or what other solution may emerge for the drifting political system .
But in sharp contrast to this domestic uncertainty , Turkish foreign policy is tougher and more assertive than ever .
In a series of blunt warnings of economic pressure and even military strikes , Turkish leaders are using their growing power to achieve what they consider vital policy goals .
Turkey 's most recent foreign policy success came on the tense island of Cyprus , which is divided between Turkish and Greek sectors .
The Greek -backed government there had planned to deploy Russian anti-aircraft missiles .
Turkey responded by promising to bomb them .
Last week , the Cypriots backed down .
Turkey cannot claim full credit because the United States and several European countries had also urged that the deployment be canceled .
But in other areas , Turkish leaders have won important battles on their own .
In October , Turkish generals and political leaders demanded that neighboring Syria expel the Kurdish rebel leader Abdullah Ocalan , who has directed a 14-year guerrilla war in southeastern Turkey .
They strongly hinted that Turkey would attack Syria if it did not comply , and they sent soldiers to the Syrian border .
With an alacrity that some in the region found astonishing , Syria quickly expelled Ocalan .
`` Obviously Syria was feeling weak , '' said a European diplomat with long experience in the Middle East .
`` It could n't have resisted an attack by Turkey and it did n't want to be humiliated , especially with Israel watching . ''
From Syria , Ocalan flew to Russia .
Turkish officials warned Russia that if he was allowed to stay there , they would demand instant repayment of Russian debts and force the scores of Turkish companies operating in Russia to cease operations immediately .
Within days , Ocalan was on the road again .
His next stop was Italy , and immediately after he landed there , Turkish leaders demanded that Italy send him home to face trial .
But Italy , which is governed by a left-leaning coalition that includes some who sympathize with Kurdish rebels , proved less pliant and refused to extradite Ocalan , saying it could not legally send him to a country where he faced the death penalty .
Outraged Turks have threatened to ban Italian imports , which are worth many millions of dollars to Italian companies , and to reject Italian bids for huge Turkish military contacts .
Newspapers here are full of predictions that Italy will soon send Ocalan away .
Turkey is also using high-pressure tactics to persuade foreign oil companies that they should build their main export pipeline for Caspian crude through Turkey rather than another route .
The oil companies want to build a shorter and cheaper pipeline to Georgia , and then send their crude in tankers across the Black Sea and through the Bosporus .
But Foreign Minister Ismail Cem asserted that the Bosporus was already full and that Turkey would no longer `` grant any priority to oil tankers . ''
Later , the Turks went even further .
They told the two main partners in the Caspian oil consortium , Amoco and BP , that if they continued supporting a pipeline route outside of Turkey , Turkey would revoke their permits to explore for oil in Turkish waters .
Turkish officials also said they would disqualify Amoco 's bid to build a new $ 500 million liquid natural gas terminal here .
By some standards , Turkey is well positioned to use such tough tactics .
It has a strong economy , a population of 65 million and 370,000 soldiers under arms , more than any other NATO country except the United States .
Partly due to its old alliance with the United States and its new partnership with Israel , its military is well trained , disciplined and equipped .
At the same time , Turkey 's regional rivals are extraordinarily weak .
Iraq is suffering under crushing U.N. sanctions , Iran is torn by internal conflict , and Russia is in political , military and economic disarray .
Turkey itself is hardly a model of stability .
Prime Minister Mesut Yilmaz lost a vote of confidence in November , and feuding political leaders have proved unable to put together a new government to succeed him .
But military commanders have stepped into the political vacuum .
They have taken a decisive role in foreign and security policy , and are responsible for much of Turkey 's new assertiveness .
`` All of this tends to back up the idea of a newly activist Turkey , '' Alan Makovsky , a specialist in Turkish affairs at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy , said in a telephone interview .
`` Even as recently as 1990 , the Turkish state was largely third-world militarily and economically , '' Makovsky said .
`` It had no modern weaponry , it faced countries that were well armed and backed by the Soviets , and it was basically inward-looking .
Now all of that has changed .
`` Turkey has more than 1,000 M -60 tanks and 200 F -16 fighters .
It 's the 17th or 18th largest economy in the world .
The Turks still ca n't push everyone around , but they can stir the pot in a way they could n't five years ago .
When they threaten economic or even military retaliation , it 's not something that 's easy to dismiss . ''
