MOSCOW --
President Hafez Assad of Syria , in Moscow for the first time since the end of the Cold War , signaled Tuesday that he might be ready to rejoin the Middle East peace effort he abandoned after Benjamin Netanyahu became Israel 's Prime Minister in 1996 .
In a statement issued by Assad and President Boris Yeltsin , the two leaders said the election of Ehud Barak as prime minister of Israel opened `` specific opportunities for constructive efforts towards a comprehensive and just peace '' in the region .
The statement was issued hours after Barak challenged Assad , in a speech delivered before his swearing-in , to make peace with Israel `` as quickly as possible . ''
Yeltsin and Assad did not mention that challenge in their remarks .
Earlier in the day , Russia 's foreign minister , Igor Ivanov , told reporters that no Middle East peace would be possible until Israel and Syria resumed negotiations .
The Middle East was a key element in Tuesday 's meeting , an effort by Russia and Syria to breathe new life into an alliance that flourished during the Soviet era but since has withered along with Moscow 's military and political influence in the region .
One telling indicator is commerce .
In Soviet times , the two countries conducted more than $ 1 billion in trade each year .
In the first quarter of 1999 , Russian sold Syria only $ 12 million in goods , and Syria shipped less than $ 6 million worth to Russia .
But Tuesday there was every indication that the two nations ' interests dovetailed .
Assad arrived asking for the same things he sought when Leonid Brezhnev ran the Soviet Union : jets and arms , Moscow 's backing in the struggle with Israel and , perhaps , a scolding for the United States .
Yeltsin , eager to put his military industry to work and looking for a greater role in world affairs , seemed only too happy to oblige .
As for the United States , Ivanov said the two men had agreed that Washington and its allies must not be allowed to impose their will on other countries .
Assad is reported to be seeking to buy as much as $ 2 billion in weaponry , including Russia 's new MIG -29 SMT jet fighter , to modernize a Syrian military equipped almost entirely with aging Soviet -supplied weapons .
The United States officially frowns on the sale , and should it go through , a Federal law penalizing governments that supply lethal weapons to terrorist countries could require the White House to suspend some assistance to Russia .
Syria is a perennial member of the State Department 's annual list of nations that sponsor international terrorism .
Negotiations over weapons purchases have been clouded by another factor : Syria owes Russia $ 12 billion , debt accumulated during Soviet times and never repaid .
But Yeltsin appeared to remove that obstacle Tuesday by ordering his government 's ministries to form a committee to settle the loan issue .
No weapons deal was concluded Tuesday .
But Russian officials said the two leaders agreed to step up military and technical cooperation , and Assad is to meet on Wednesday with Russia 's defense minister , Igor Sergeyev .
Assad wants to buy weapons in part to strengthen his hand if peace talks with Israel resume .
In their statement tonight , Yeltsin and Assad argued that a peace agreement should satisfy one of Syria 's basic demands , the withdrawal of Israeli forces from southern Lebanon and territory in the Golan Heights that Israel captured from Syria during the Arab - Israeli war of June 1967 .
