KUWAIT --
A surprise trip to Russia by the Syrian president , Hafez al- Assad , is looming as the first step in an expected flurry of Middle East diplomacy as Arab and Israeli leaders jockey for position in a peace effort that , for the first time in three years , is suddenly showing signs of life .
Assad , whose country is armed largely with aging Soviet weapons , had not visited Moscow since the collapse of the Soviet Union .
He abruptly canceled a scheduled trip to Moscow in April , when Benjamin Netanyahu was still Israel 's prime minister and prospects for a broader regional peace still looked grim .
But the regional picture has changed sharply since the election in May of Ehud Barak as Israel 's prime minister-elect .
In recent days , there have been exchanges of signals from all sides of genuine interest in rekindling the quest for a broader peace .
Now , on just three days ' notice , Assad is scheduled to arrive in Moscow on Monday , in what appears to be a clear bid to enlist Syria 's old patron once again on his behalf .
In a scheduled meeting with President Boris Yeltsin , Assad will certainly seek support for its longtime demand for the full return of the Golan Heights , the territory seized by Israel in the 1967 war .
And Western diplomats say Assad will also seek Yeltsin 's agreement to sell his country as much as $ 2 billion in arms , as he seeks to enter any peace talks from a position of strength .
Syria , long cash-strapped , still owes Moscow $ 12 billion to repay aid provided for more than 20 years , and that has been an obstacle to further arms sales in the past .
But in recent months , the diplomats said Sunday , there have been indications that Russia may be willing , at least for now , to set aside the unresolved debt , in the hope that renewing close ties with Syria may help Moscow to restore at least influence in the Middle East .
`` The timing is perfect for Assad , '' a Western diplomat who is based in Damascus said Sunday .
`` If Russia agrees to supply Syria with weapons , it will enhance Syria 's position in negotiations with Israel . ''
The trip by Assad , who will turn 70 this year and rarely travels outside his country , is expected to kick off a travel blitz by key regional leaders .
Barak is expected to travel to Washington in the next few weeks to meet with President Clinton , and he is also expected to meet soon with Yasser Arafat , the Palestinian leader .
And Egypt 's president , Hosni Mubarak , whose country made its peace with Israel two decades ago , has pledged to resume an intermediary 's role by meeting soon with Barak , Assad and Arafat .
On Saturday , during a stop in France after a trip to the United States in which he met with Clinton , Mubarak said he was `` very optimistic for the future . ''
`` I am sure that the two main issues , that of the Palestinians and of Syria and Lebanon , will be treated with equal priority , '' he said after a lunch with President Jacques Chirac of France at Elysee Palace .
One indication that all sides may be trying to smooth the way to serious talks has been their tame response to Israel 's air attack 10 days ago on sites in Lebanon , which killed nine people and wounded more than two dozen others .
Barak distanced himself from the strike , which was launched by Netanyahu 's outgoing government in reply to cross-border missile attacks by Hezbollah guerrillas .
And Syria , the main power broker in Lebanon and a key Hezbollah sponsor , has shown a willingness to set the matter aside .
`` I think everyone is looking seriously now to the prospect of real negotiations , '' a Western diplomat said Sunday .
One reason for the Arab anxiousness , Syrian and Lebanese officials have said in recent interviews , is a real concern that Vice President Al Gore 's election bid may by year 's end leave the Clinton administration shy about weighing in seriously on matters of Middle East peace , given domestic U.S. sensitivities .
By contrast , the Kremlin , in an announcement on Friday , said Assad was traveling to Russia at Yeltsin 's official invitation -- a possible sign , Western diplomats say , that the unresolved dispute over Russia 's peacekeeping role in Kosovo has left Yeltsin eager to find other ways to assert his country 's role as a power broker .
Any major arms purchase by Syria now , at a potentially crucial time in the peace effort , would certainly attract criticism from Israel .
But Syria 's military strength has withered badly in recent years , and Damascus could make the case that it would remain far from parity with Israel .
According to Western diplomats , the centerpiece of the $ 2 billion arms deal under discussion by Syrian and Russian officials is an upgraded version of Russia 's MiG -29 fighter aircraft , which has been in production only since December .
The discussions have focused on anti-tank systems , a high priority to Syria but a subject that has prompted warnings from Washington that aid to Russia may be canceled if the sale of those weapons goes ahead .
Syria is regarded by Washington as a key element in the Middle East process , but it also remains on a State Department list of nations that sponsor or support terrorism .
U.S. law requires the withholding of aid to nations that transfer lethal military equipment to any country that appears on that list .
