UNITED NATIONS --
Losing allies at the Security Council , Iraq on Monday unexpectedly began to cut off exports of the oil it sells to pay for food for its citizens .
The sales are permitted under a specially regulated U.N. program meant to alleviate the suffering of ordinary Iraqis under long-lasting economic sanctions .
The sanctions have punished Baghdad for not showing it has eliminated weapons of mass destruction .
If Iraq fails to carry out the food program , `` it will be thumbing its nose at the international community again , '' said James Rubin , the State Department spokesman .
The Iraqis said they were protesting the Security Council 's decision last week to extend the program for only two weeks , instead of the normal six months .
The short-term extension was decided on when members of the Security Council reached an impasse on whether to change the terms of the program to benefit Iraq .
Some diplomats and officials said that the Iraqi move was not clearly understandable , but that Iraq has repeatedly created crises when events were not moving in its favor .
While actions by the secretive government are rarely fully explained and officials at the United Nations have become accustomed to waiting for Iraqi policy changes to play themselves out .
Initial impressions late Monday were that the decision to stop exporting oil was a temporary step , but one that could hurt Iraq 's reputation further .
Rubin said , `` Every time that Iraq shows its contempt for the world , and its contempts for the world 's concern about the people of Iraq , it only makes it harder for Iraq 's positions to be taken seriously in the Security Council . ''
Fred Eckhard , the U.N. spokesman , said that independent oil experts who oversee exports from Iraq reported Monday morning that the Iraqis had cut the flow of oil to the Turkish port of Ceyhan and were preparing to stop shipments from the Iraqi port of Mina al Bakr on Tuesday .
There are no other major export points .
Afterward , crude-oil prices rose in the New York market to over $ 27 a barrel , a nine-year high .
Iraq had been trading about 5 percent of the oil sold worldwide .
The government of President Saddam Hussein has told officials that it will not sign a new agreement to continue the program , which in the last six months earned more than $ 7 billion .
The program was intended to relieve the hardships suffered by the Iraqi population because of nearly a decade of international sanctions .
Diplomats looking for ways to explain Iraq 's step on Monday say that the Iraqis may see their support in the Security Council eroding .
Under pressure to reinstitute a disarmament program and send inspectors back to Iraq after a year during which President Saddam Hussein has been free of on-the-ground arms surveillance , the five permanent council members -- Britain , China , France , Russia and the United States -- have been working almost nonstop on a compromise that will allow Russia , Iraq 's strongest ally on the council , to support a new plan , or at least not veto it .
Some diplomats say that the Iraqis may have been stunned by reports that the Russians had informally offered the United States a deal during the recent European security summit meeting in Istanbul , Turkey , that would have softened Russian opposition to a Western resolution on Iraq in return for U.S. restraint in criticizing Moscow 's war in Chechnya .
The Russians deny that such an offer was made .
France , which at times has argued in favor of Iraq , is now considered to be part of the consensus behind a resolution that would demand that Iraq accept and cooperate with arms inspectors in return for a suspension -- not a final lifting -- of sanctions for renewable periods .
The French say they are concerned that Iraq , with a record of secret prohibited arms programs , is not being monitored .
France is now expected to back the new inspection system being discussed .
Iraq has said repeatedly that it will not accept any inspection system that does not lift sanctions first .
The Iraqi government , which has long chafed under the close monitoring and tight financial controls of the `` oil for food '' program , may also be holding it hostage at a critical moment to win concessions on both plans .
