JOHANNESBURG , January 12 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- South Africa 's proposed sale of tank firing control systems to Syria has caused `` concerns '' from Israel and the United States , the `` Sunday Times '' newspaper said today .
The contract of three billion Rands -LRB- about 638 million US Dollars -RRB- has been conditionally approved by South Africa 's National Conventional Arms Control Committee -LRB- NCACC -RRB- , said the report .
Kader Asmal , the NCACC chairman and the Water Affairs minister , declined to comment on NCACC 's recommendation that the sale be authorized , saying the matter was `` not something in the public domain '' .
In fear of angering the U.S. , the South African government , however , made its support to the proposed sale conditional on the approval of Deputy President Thabo Mbeki , who was not present when the issue was discussed .
The sale plan would return to the cabinet for reconsideration if Mbeki thought the deal would contravene the U.S. Counter - Terrorism Act against countries which provide lethal military equipment to U.S. -styled `` state sponsors of terrorism '' .
Ricky Naidoo , Mbeki 's spokesman , confirmed that the matter had been referred to Mbeki after a cabinet meeting in December .
`` He is still considering it , '' said Naidoo , adding the issue would be discussed again by the government later this month when a final decision would be expected .
Nevertheless , the proposed deal signaled a clear break with the government 's original policies that favored Israel over the Arab states .
Victor Harel , Israel 's acting ambassador to South Africa , said yesterday he was not aware of the details , but he would take the matter up with the Department of Foreign Affairs this week .
Harel stressed that any sale of military equipment to Syria was `` a source of concern '' for Israel and its security , saying the Middle East peace process , in general , should be helped by all friends of such process .
The paper also quoted U.S. official sources as saying that the arms sale deal would `` raise concerns '' .
A source in the U.S. State Department was quoted as warning that there would be serious trouble if the equipment to be supplied to Syria contained U.S. technology or components .
