MOSCOW , February 17 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Russia and Syria agreed Wednesday that a Middle East settlement needs progress in Israel 's ties with Syria , Lebanon as well as the Palestinians .
Moscow and Damascus `` are unanimous in the opinion that the Middle Eastern settlement can be talked about after progress is made not only on the Israeli - Palestinian issues , but on Israeli - Syrian and Israeli - Lebanese ones as well , '' Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov said at a press conference following his meeting with his Syrian counterpart , Farouk ash- Shara .
`` We are absolutely convinced of the need for continuity and sequence in the negotiating process so as to accommodate previous agreements .
The Syrian and Lebanese tracks should be brought closer , '' he said .
Ivanov said Russia is conducting consultations with all states involved in the Middle East peace process aimed at `` sketching out possible steps for advancing every aspect of the settlement . ''
His talks with the Syrian foreign minister `` reaffirmed the interest of both Arab countries and Israel in Russia 's active role as a co-sponsor , '' Ivanov said .
Ash - Shara , who arrived here Tuesday on a three-day working visit , is scheduled to meeting Russian Defense Minister Igor Sergeyev Thursday , Interfax reported .
Syria will `` extend military technological cooperation with Russia and no one has any right to criticize us for this , '' ash- Shara said , in apparent reference to the United States ' threat that it might cut aid to Russia by 50 million U.S. dollars a year in response to Russian supplies of anti-tank weapons to Syria .
`` Syria has a legitimate right to self-defense and nurtures no aggressive plans against any country , '' but `` the conditions we live in compel us to arm and to seek ways to defend ourselves , '' ash- Shara ' said .
He dismissed the view that Syria could disturb the regional balance since it only possesses the military equivalent of just one-tenth of the Israeli arsenal .
