VX , the chemical nerve agent that the administration alleges Sudan was preparing to make , is one of the deadliest nerve agents known to man , especially when applied to the skin .
A 10 milligram drop on the skin can kill an adult human in 15 minutes .
An organophosphate that is chemically related to certain insecticides , VX interferes with the ability of nerves to regenerate themselves and to fire again .
It causes loss of muscle control , convulsive seizures , respiratory paralysis and almost certain death .
Synthesized by British scientists who were searching for new insecticides after World War II , VX can contaminate an area for days .
It is said to be a thousand times more potent than the nerve agent sarin .
U.S. Chemical Corp. announced in its annual report after VX was standardized in 1957 , `` The reign of mustard gas , which has been called the King of Battle Gases since it was first used in July 1917 , will probably come to an end . ''
Defense Secretary William Cohen said in a press conference Thursday that the administration had bombed the Shifa Chemical Complex in Northeast Khartoum in the Sudan because the intelligence community was `` confident '' that the plant was `` involved in the production of chemical weapons agents , including precursor chemicals for deadly V -series of nerve agents , like , for example , VX. '' Jonathan Tucker , director of the Chemical and Biological Weapons nonproliferation project at the Monterey Institute of International Studies , said that there were three likely possibilities for those agents : the main precursors phosphorous
`` A pesticide plant could be used as a cover for a nerve agent production facility , although the production equipment would have to be modified , '' Tucker said .
Between 1961 to 1968 , the United States produced large quantities of VX , and currently has roughly 4500 tons in its weapons stockpile .
The Soviet Union produced at least that much of a similar agent called V -gas , and also has vast stockpiles .
But both countries have ratified the 1993 Chemical Weapons Convention , which requires complete destruction of all such stockpiles .
Other countries , however , are suspected of having VX , among them Iran and Syria .
Recent inspections by the U.N. Special Commission charged with disarming Iraq have revealed that Baghdad produced large quantities of VX and filled it into SCUD missile warheads .
Iraq has acknowledged that it once had sufficient precursor chemicals to make nearly 500 tons of VX , but claims that all its VX stocks have been destroyed .
A senior administration official said that Osama Bin Laden , the Saudi -born financier , has been working with the Islamic militant government in Sudan since 1995 to develop and buy dual use equipment that can be used to produce VX and other weapons of mass destruction .
Specifically , they said , Bin Laden had been working with the militant Islamic government in Khartoum to improve Sudan 's chemical capabilities in what the Sudanese call its `` military-industrial complex , '' part of which is said to include the chemical plant bombed Thursday .
According to a February report published by the House of Representatives ' Task Force on Terrorism & Unconventional Warfare , Iraq has also provided assistance to Sudan 's covert program to develop chemical weapons , a charge that the Khartoum government has denied .
Specifically , the task force report charges that Iraq in 1995 helped Sudan build a chemical weapons plant in Wau , in south-western Sudan , as well as a gas storage site .
Sudanese opposition groups have also charged that Sudan used Iraqi mustard gas which it has stored since the Gulf war against rebels , who have been fighting a protracted war against the Islamic government in Khartoum .
General Wafiq al- Sammarai , former head of Iraqi Military Intelligence , who defected to the West in 1994 , has charged that Iraq actually used VX gas against Iranian soldiers in the battle of Fao , one of the fiercest battles in the Iran - Iraq war in 1988 .
That allegation has not been confirmed , and experts agree that VX has only rarely been used .
The only terrorist group known to have used VX is Aum Shinrikyo , the Japanese cult which staged the attack on the Tokyo subway .
Japanese prosecutors in 1996 charged cult leaders with using VX , which the cult 's guru called a ` divine power , '' to kill cult critics in late 1994 and 1995 .
