Robert Jay Lifton , professor of psychology and psychiatry at John Jay College and the Graduate Center of the City University of New York , has spent a good part of his life studying apocalyptic evil and its consequences .
In 1969 his `` Death in Life '' explored the psychospiritual aftereffects of the atomic bomb attacks on Japan .
`` The Nazi Doctors '' tried to answer the question of how German physicians allowed themselves to be so morally deformed that they put their knowledge of healing to the service of Nazi cruelty and murder .
There are many echoes of Lifton 's earlier themes in his new book , `` Destroying the World to Save It , '' which is mostly a study of Aum Shinrikyo , the messianic Japanese cult that carried out a nerve-gas attack in the Tokyo subway in 1995 .
Lifton 's subject once again is the nature of self-justifying evil , the way in which those who carry out acts of lunatic criminality are persuaded of the higher good of their actions .
But he takes this theme a step forward as he compares Aum Shinrikyo to other cults , especially American ones like the Peoples Temple and Heaven 's Gate , to reach an alarming conclusion : that the combination of apocalyptic , paranoid groups and readily available weapons of mass destruction poses a dreadful new style of menace .
`` Aum 's danger to the world -- and its greatest significance -- lay in its joining of megalomania to ultimate weapons , '' Lifton writes .
As with all of Lifton 's reflections on politics and psychology , this one has many powerful and compelling insights .
And yet these insights mingle with a certain intellectual overreaching and a rhetorical vagueness that sap the argument of its power and persuasiveness .
There is an abstractness to Lifton 's line of analysis , the use of a lot of fancy clinical language that does n't quite hit the explanatory bull 's-eye .
Lifton cites various notions that he finds common to the otherwise dissimilar cults that he studied -- their adherents ' idea that death is purifying ; their paranoid belief in the existence of evil forces that are persecuting them ; their overriding need for spiritual meaning , immortality , power .
But one has the sense that these terms are not quite up to solving the mysteries that Lifton himself evokes .
Lifton is best at description , and he begins with a long and richly detailed description of Aum Shinrikyo and its charismatic , probably schizophrenic leader , Shoko Asahara .
As many will remember , Asahara 's nerve-gas attack in the Tokyo subway killed a dozen people , but the goal was to achieve -LRB- if that is the word -RRB- far more than that .
Asahara wanted to bring about a mass global slaughter after which only he , the brilliant prophet , and his followers would remain .
`` For the first time in history , '' Lifton writes , striking his main theme , `` end-time religious fanaticism allied itself with weapons capable of destroying the world and a group embarked on the mad project of doing just that . ''
Lifton interviewed former members of Aum Shinrikyo and compiled the information available on it to produce a portrait of the cult and its guru that is truly hair-raising .
Asahara was the kind of lunatic visionary who could visit the oldest pyramid in Egypt and seriously declare not only that he had seen it before but that `` I designed it myself a long time ago . ''
Using an amalgam of Buddhist ideas , Shintoism , pseudoscience and charisma , he was able to attract talented men and women to his cause , including doctors and scientists .
One of them was a reputable cardiac surgeon named Ikuo Hayashi , who abandoned real medicine for what Lifton sensibly calls `` medicalized criminality . ''
Among other things , Hayashi invented what he called `` new narco , '' in which he used a sequence of thiopental injections to produce semi-comatose states , and then used five to seven electrical shocks followed by more thiopental to bring about memory loss among cult members who had committed crimes for the group .
Lifton 's reporting on the Aum cult and on the distance that otherwise intelligent people are able to travel toward the annihilation of a genuine moral self is very good .
It is when Lifton turns to the reasons that these people lose the self in the totalistic doctrine of the cult that his language becomes blandly and mistily clinical .
`` We cannot say how much of a prior tendency toward dissociation he brought to his pre- Aum medical career , '' Lifton writes of Hayashi , `` but he certainly experienced in Aum a powerful fusing of the all-encompassing answer he sought with a dissociative response -- doubling , the formation of two selves that are morally and functionally antithetical although part of the same psyche . ''
Such phrases somehow do not explain how a man of science could wreck lives in the service of mumbo jumbo .
A similar sort of nonspecific quality surrounds Lifton 's discussion of the factors in Japan that gave rise to Aum .
Among these are `` psychohistorical dislocation , a breakdown of the social and institutional arrangements '' whose roots , in Lifton 's view , are in Japan 's defeat in World War II and the experience of the atomic bomb .
Lifton has interesting things to say about Japan here .
Yet the fact remains that Aum Shinrikyo was never more than an isolated , ultra-fringe phenomenon in Japan , which despite its `` psychohistorical dislocation '' and its `` individual and collective shape-shifting '' -LRB- whatever that is -RRB- is in general a prosperous , law-abiding and stable democracy .
As for the danger that a new form of global terrorism is upon us , it would of course be foolish for the world 's police forces not to be on guard for the private makers of sarin or for those who dream , as Asahara did , of obtaining nuclear weapons .
He did n't succeed , of course .
In fact , he never came remotely close to achieving his apocalyptic objectives , nor could he have done so .
Aum and the other cults discussed in this book did shocking things .
Still , Lifton does not make the case that there is anything especially new or more globally menacing than what the world has faced from the troubling phenomenon of psychotic megalomania in the past .
PUBLICATION NOTES : ` DESTROYING THE WORLD TO SAVE IT ' By Robert Jay Lifton 374 pages .
Metropolitan Books .
$ 26.00
