TOKYO --
The cult that planted nerve gas in the Tokyo subway three years ago , killing 12 people and injuring thousands more , is back .
Aum Shinrikyo , which was found responsible for the sarin attack and for several murders with VX , the most toxic nerve agent known , is regrouping , recruiting new members at home and abroad , and raising vast sums of money , security officials and Japanese and American terrorism experts say .
The U.S. State Department has designated it a terrorist group , although it has not been linked to any illegal acts since 1995 .
The resurgence of the sect that masterminded the most serious terrorist attack in Japan 's modern history , the officials said , is a result partly of Japan 's unwillingness to ban it .
The Tokyo district court deprived Aum Shinrikyo of its legal religious status in 1995 and liquidated its assets after declaring it insolvent the following year .
But the Japanese government decided last year that the Justice Ministry had not proved that the group posed an `` immediate or obvious threat '' to Japanese society .
It rejected a request from security officials to outlaw the sect under a 1952 law against subversive activities .
The law has never been applied .
As a result , despite security experts ' warnings , Aum Shinrikyo , arguing that the government has effectively sanctioned its existence , has used the decision to rebound .
`` There has been no word of repentance or apology , '' concludes the Public Security Investigation Agency , the main intelligence arm of Japan 's Ministry of Justice , in a 70-page report issued in January .
Moreover , the document states , Aum Shinrikyo -- the name is the Buddhist mantra `` Om '' followed by `` Supreme Truth '' -- has not revised or abandoned `` its dangerous doctrine that justifies murder to achieve its ends . ''
According to the report and interviews with Japanese security officials and independent experts , the group now has about 5,000 followers , including 500 `` monks , '' followers who are `` ordained '' and live communally .
It operates some 28 installations at 18 branches -LRB- down from a peak of 24 -RRB- throughout the country .
A BAN IN RUSSIA PROVES NO DETERRENT Despite being banned in Russia , the group is still active there , as well as in Ukraine , Belarus and Kazakhstan .
It maintains encrypted Web sites and chat rooms in Japanese , English and Russian and controls a network of electronic , computer and other stores that generated about $ 30 million in revenues in 1997 .
Its publishing company , now its second-largest source of revenue , reopened in April and issues at least one book or pamphlet a month , officials said .
The group is far weaker and poorer than it was at the peak of its influence in 1995 , when it owned about 30 pieces of property throughout Japan , as well as a business empire that controlled restaurants , computers and other technology companies .
Its net worth was estimated at $ 20 million to $ 1 billion .
It was also said to have 10,000 followers in Japan and up to 40,000 in other countries , 30,000 of them in Russia .
Still , the group 's resurgence deeply troubles security officials , who say they monitor known followers and businesses 24 hours a day and continue searching for three of its leaders accused of involvement in earlier plots and deadly assaults .
Signs of the group 's resurgence abound .
Among them , say the police and other experts , is Trisal , a store that customizes computer systems at discount prices .
The tiny office , four stories up a steep , narrow staircase in a small Tokyo office building , is staffed by very young salespeople and jammed with bargain hunters , most of them also young .
Asked whether the cult had a financial stake in the company , a Trisal spokesman said , `` Not really . ''
And a spokesman for the group declined to comment on whether it has a financial stake in Trisal or in any of the other electronics companies that Japanese authorities identify as directly or indirectly controlled by the sect .
But Hiroshi Araki , the spokesman since his predecessor 's arrest in 1996 , did not deny that Aum Shinrikyo had financial ties to several businesses reportedly owned by or employing its followers .
`` Naming them and discussing such things would only help the government harass the companies and people who work for them , '' Araki explained in an interview in the group 's library , which was filled with books and pamphlets describing the beliefs of the sect 's founder and spiritual leader , Shoko Asahara .
The half-blind 43-year -old guru preached his own blend of Hinduism and Buddhism with an apocalyptic spin .
According to his books and preaching , his followers will rise from the ashes of Armageddon .
To speed the new order , he planned to help destroy the old one by assembling a corps of young scientists to develop and use chemical , biological and other weapons of mass destruction .
Asahara remains in jail while being tried on 17 counts of murder , kidnapping , trafficking in guns and drugs , the subway attack with sarin nerve gas , and other assaults with chemical or biological weapons .
He has pleaded not guilty .
After the Tokyo attack , the police said that 427 people , known or suspected members of Aum Shinrikyo , were arrested ; of those , 215 were eventually released without charge .
Of the ones let go , the police said , 155 have returned to the cult .
Of those charged , 156 have been convicted .
More than 30 members are still on trial .
Despite the convictions , arrests and what the police acknowledge is constant surveillance , the cult has continued to hold regular training sessions , recruiting members and raising money .
In May , more than 500 believers and others curious about the sect gathered at a resort near Mount Fuji to hear sermons and receive training in yoga , meditation and other activities .
Security officials and private experts estimate that the group raised about 50 million yen , or about $ 350,000 , from that meeting alone .
While the police say there is no evidence that the cult has resumed its efforts to make or buy weapons of mass destruction , the cult still worries them .
Using anthrax , botulism toxin and a variety of other germ or chemical weapons , the sect repeatedly conducted covert attacks against targets including a U.S. military base where thousands of Americans live , throughout the early 1990s .
Although these earlier efforts failed , the sect 's secret sarin attack on an apartment complex in Matsumoto almost a year before its Tokyo subway attack resulted in seven deaths and 600 injuries .
After the police finally raided the sect 's compound at the foot of Mount Fuji following the subway sarin attack , they found tons of chemicals for use in weapons , although the cult 's stocks of VX , 50 kilograms of sarin and other deadly agents had already been destroyed , said Anthony Tu , a Colorado State University chemist who advised the Japanese police on the case .
While many Aum Shinrikyo members are now unwilling to identify themselves as such , security officials say that hundreds of hard-core believers remain despite the 1995 subway attack .
Many provide financial assistance to fellow members , officials say , and even to the three senior cult fugitives .
`` It 's hard to imagine that such fugitives could still be at large here without the active help of believers , '' one official said .
Security officials expressed particular concern about the group 's continued allure for young scientists , engineers and other well-educated people who might be able to reassemble an arms arsenal .
Satoshi Izumi , a reporter at the daily Asahi Shimbun , said that almost 200 of some 1,400 Aum monks investigated by security officials were university students or graduates .
Most of those who put bags of sarin nerve gas in the subways in 1995 were graduates of the science departments of leading universities .
Several experts have interpreted the rise of religious cults -- 185,000 of which are registered with the government -- as a response to the strains of modern Japanese society .
They also caution about the persistence of the underlying conditions that leave young Japanese vulnerable to groups like Aum. As Taro Maki , the former editor of Sunday Mainichi , put it , `` In a country whose fathers are utterly preoccupied with work , whose mothers want their children to be winners and whose educational system prides itself on the fiercest of competition for admission , these new-new religions , as they are called -- or pseudoreligions , as I call them -- are attractive to kids who do n't quite make the cut , or to those who
Maki waged an early campaign against Aum Shinrikyo .
Even many defectors remain mesmerized by Asahara .
Still calling him their father , they have told Robert Jay Lifton , the American psychiatrist who is writing a book about the group , that the guru retains almost mystical powers .
Araki , the Aum Shinrikyo spokesman , said he had abandoned art history studies at Kyoto University after attending a lecture by Asahara .
The guru , he recalled , left him with an almost `` indescribable sense of peace and inner harmony . ''
Asked how he could defend the guru 's orders to kill innocent people with sarin , Araki , 30 , replied that he still could not believe that Asahara was responsible for the attacks , because the guru `` would not give such an unjust command . ''
Experts disagree about whether the group is still dangerous .
Many argue that with Asahara and other leaders in jail , it poses little immediate threat .
Even security officials concede that given their surveillance , it would be unlikely to stage illegal actions now .
But they worry about copycat attacks , and about Aum Shinrikyo 's potential .
At the moment , they say , the group is led by a secretive steering committee of six senior members who have increasingly focused on two of Asahara 's six children -- his third daughter and his youngest son -- as spiritual symbols .
But by next summer , Fumihiro Joyu , the group 's former spokesman , may be out of jail , since he has been charged only with relatively minor crimes like perjury .
Because he continues to declare his adoration of Asahara and has become something of a teen idol -- girls are said to swoon over his photo and snap up Joyu T -shirts and posters -- government and private experts fear that he could regalvanize the group and reunite its warring factions .
OFFICIAL AMBIVALENCE AIDS SECT 'S CAUSE Nevertheless , there is little support within political circles for banning the group , even among some of its most ardent opponents .
Maki , for one , argues that outlawing the group would only drive it underground , making it harder to track and possibly compelling it to ever more desperate acts .
He and others also trace this hesitancy to a reaction against the prewar government 's repression of political , and particularly religious , groups .
Noting that Japan 's modern legal system was adopted after World War II at the behest of the United States , the government has been sensitive to any charges of limiting religious freedom .
Moreover , Japan 's political left and other small groups fear the precedent : they might be the law 's next targets , said Seizaburo Sato , research director of Japan 's Institute for International Policy Studies .
Religious status in Japan affords considerable political sanctuary .
So other religions , some of which support political groups and agendas , oppose any government action that might constrain their own freedom .
Sato noted , for instance , that the Soka Gakkai , a Buddhist sect founded here in the 1930s , recently delivered 7.5 million votes in national elections to the party it supported .
`` So no political party is going to alienate religious groups and sects by supporting a ban on the Aum , '' Sato said .
Shoko Egawa , the author of several books on Aum Shinrikyo , argues that short of banning the group , the government could do more to discourage its activities .
`` The authorities could use the tax and employment laws more effectively to help curtail their resurgence , '' she said , `` but they do not . ''
Some analysts even suspect a widespread sympathy for cult members who say they knew nothing about the violence .
They embraced the group because of its opposition to the materialism that , while making Japan the world 's second-strongest economy , has also created nostalgia for values that may have been discarded in the postwar rush to modernize .
But Yoichi Funabashi , the diplomatic correspondent of Asahi Shimbun , rejects this .
He said opposition to invoking the law against subversive activities reflected the broader political paralysis that has prevented Japan from taking serious measures to resolve its economic crisis .
`` Civil society has an obligation to protect itself , '' he said .
