WASHINGTON --
As U.S. military forces moved by air , land and sea to prepare for a possible attack on Iraq last February , President Clinton received a top-secret briefing at the White House .
For much of the month , he learned , military computer systems around the country had been penetrated .
The Pentagon did n't know who the intruders were , where they were based or how deeply they had probed into the 3,000 or so separate networks considered critical to U.S. military operations .
Fearing that the hackers might be Iraqi operatives , Defense Department officials worried for nearly three tense weeks whether the planned mission might have been compromised .
Eventually , they learned that instead of enemy agents , the computer commandos were a couple of California teenagers .
Inside the Pentagon , relief was fleeting .
If high school-educated techno-buffs could breach national security with an ordinary desktop computer , some asked , what sort of damage might be inflicted by a savvy band of well-funded terrorists ?
Three months later , Clinton announced in a nationally televised commencement address to the U.S. Naval Academy that the United States would step up its efforts to combat a new generation of terrorists .
`` Our security is challenged increasingly by non-traditional threats , '' Clinton said .
`` Rather than invading our beaches or launching bombers , these adversaries may attempt cyber-attacks against our critical military systems and our economic base , or they may deploy compact and relatively cheap weapons of mass destruction -- not just nuclear , but also chemical or biological , to use disease as a weapon of war . ''
The president has sharply increased his funding request for anti-terror preparations in next year 's budget to more than $ 1 billion , and Congress seems inclined to go along -- although some members question whether the administration is prepared to effectively manage an effort involving a broad array of federal and state agencies .
The effort comes as terrorists are reaching for advances in modern technology to strengthen their hand .
`` Terrorism obviously is nothing new -- it has always been the weapon of the weak , '' said Frank Cilluffo , director of the terrorism task force at the Center for Strategic and International Studies -LRB- CSIS -RRB- , a Washington research center .
`` What is new , though , is the changing face of terrorism coupled with the development of new technology . ''
It does n't take a scientific genius , experts say , to harness modern techniques in the service of terrorism .
`` I do n't see the terrorists being on the cutting edge , '' explained Gregory Jones , an analyst with the Rand Corp. , an international consulting firm based in Santa Monica , Calif .
`` The problem is , what used to be cutting edge is now getting to the point where the terrorists might be able to do something with it . ''
As the world 's last remaining superpower , the United States , its businesses and its citizens make high-profile targets .
The State Department tracks more than three dozen active terrorist groups .
Together , they commited 304 separate bombings , shootings , kidnappings and other terrorist acts in 1997 alone , killing 221 people , seven of them Americans , and wounding another 693 .
That was a slight increase over 1996 incident levels , but was still one of the lowest incident rates since the State Department began cataloguing terrorist activity in 1971 .
Even as terrorist activities decline slightly , however , experts worry that such attacks could become increasingly disruptive .
U.S. officials concede that the nation is ill equipped to confront the death , destruction and panic that computer hackers or someone with a nuclear , chemical or biological weapon could produce .
Two years ago , Clinton set up the President 's Commission on Critical Infrastructure Protection to assess the terrorist threat to the systems that provide the country with telecommunications , energy , water , banking services , transportation and public health and safety .
The commission 's findings have been sobering .
`` There are two scenarios for which we are not well prepared , '' said Richard A. Clarke , named by Clinton in May to the new position of national coordinator for security , infrastructure protection and counter-terrorism at the National Security Council .
`` One is a chemical and biological attack in an American city , and another is a multi-pronged computer attack that knocks down communications and electricity in several major regions simultaneously . ''
`` We have some capability in both of those cases , but it 's not anywhere near enough , '' he said .
According to Cilluffo at CSIS , `` the biggest nightmare is a bio-terrorist attack .
It 's the so-called silent killer , because the first indicator you usually hit is falling bodies . ...
We really do n't have much defense for those sorts of threats . ''
Germ warfare raises the specter of mass death by a lethal disease .
One considered a prime candidate for use by terrorists is anthrax .
The spores that carry anthrax can be stored for years , are easily dispersed through the air , and are all but impossible to detect until victims begin showing symptoms _by which time it 's often too late to save their lives .
`` If I could aerosol just a kilogram -LRB- 2.2 pounds -RRB- of spores , I could cover a large area of Washington , D.C. with a potentially lethal dose , '' said Jones .
`` You could be talking about thousands , or tens of thousands of people affected . ''
The world got an unwelcome look at another modern terror threat , chemical weapons , three years ago when the Japanese religious cult Aum Shinrikyo placed open containers of deadly sarin nerve gas in Tokyo 's packed subway system , killing 12 and injuring more than 5,000 commuters .
A threat that keeps former Sen. Sam Nunn , D - Ga. , awake at night is the fear that nuclear weapons material from the former Soviet Union could make its way into the hands of terrorists or international criminals .
`` That 's a big problem , '' said Nunn , now an attorney with the Atlanta 's King & Spalding law firm .
Working with Sen. Richard Lugar , R - Ind. , Nunn helped put in place a program in 1991 that has helped former Soviet states destroy , dismantle or deactivate more than 4,500 nuclear warheads , as well as scores of intercontinental ballistic missiles , silos and even bombers , at a cost to U.S. taxpayers of roughly $ 1.5 billion to date .
Still , however , Russia transfers an estimated 60 tons a year of nuclear weapons material from its military into an even less secure private sector .
Countering the new terrorist threat , Cilluffo said , will require enhanced intelligence resources to help root out terrorist groups and monitor their activities , as well as plans for protecting against acts that take the country by surprise .
`` Better to avoid a crisis than heroically react to one , '' said Cilluffo .
`` No matter how robust our intelligence capability , it 'll never be 100 percent , so you need to be able to prepare for terrorism , manage the consequences , mitigate the damage , minimize the loss of life . ''
In some ways , the very sophistication of the nation 's security structure adds to its vulnerability .
The powerful information , communications and imaging systems that have brought new power and efficiency to the post- Cold War military can become weaknesses to be exploited by terrorists .
`` The crux of the matter is that , as our force structure is downsizing , we become ever more reliant and dependent on superior technologies and , in particular , information technologies , '' explained the Defense Department 's Christopher Mellon , deputy assistant secretary for security and information operations .
`` Our strategy is a strategy that entails information dominance and superiority , '' Mellon said in an interview .
`` So , if the plug gets pulled on these things , and a system is brought down ...it creates a major problem . ''
The prospect of modern systems failure , moreover , is only one dimension of a multi-faceted threat .
Much of the government 's critical operations , including those of the military , rely on services provided by the private sector .
That why Clinton 's initiative , besides beefing up intelligence-gathering and reaction capabilities , seeks to build a new culture of cooperation on security matters .
`` There has to be a public-private partnership of almost an unprecedented nature , '' said Nunn , who serves on Clinton 's critical infrastructure commission .
`` I do n't believe any company 's capable of handling an attack by a well-organized , highly disciplined , multi-layered terrorist group . ''
Some industries -- nuclear power and telecommunications , for instance -- have long worked closely with government agencies -- the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the Commerce Department , among others -- to guard against terrorist or criminal activity .
Others , however , appear to have much to learn .
`` To some extent we 're trying to raise awareness because we 've had ... the mentality that we 're immune here in the United States '' because of the country 's geographic separation from most of the world 's trouble spots , said the Defense Department 's Mellon .
In cyberspace , `` that insulation disappears , and all of a sudden people from anywhere in the world can end up on these systems right here in your office , potentially , '' Mellon said .
`` You know , as the world gets smaller , and gets closer , it kind of forces us to think a little differently about the way we do counterintelligence and security . ''
As more attention is paid to the new threats , some in Congress are pressing for a fresh look at who 's in charge .
Noting that the anti-terror program includes the Departments of Defense , Justice , State and Health and Human Services , plus state agencies , they question whether it should be run by an unelected White House official with limited powers who is largely unaccountable to Congress .
Sen. Judd Gregg , R - N.H. , has called for Attorney General Janet Reno to create a five-year inter-agency anti-terror plan by Nov. 31 .
`` The biggest problem we have is getting everybody working together and having a top-down , total commitment to cooperation , '' Gregg told CQ Weekly magazine .
`` We cannot tolerate turf war on this . ''
ENDIT
