-LRB- Distributed by New York Times Special Features -RRB- In recent years terrorist operations have changed .
Airline hijackings have become rare because hijacked planes cannot stay in the air forever and few countries today are willing to let them land , thereby incurring the stigma of openly supporting terrorism .
Terrorists too saw diminishing returns on hijackings .
The trend now seems to be away from attacking specific targets such as the other side 's officials and toward more indiscriminate killing .
The belief has gained ground that terrorist missions by volunteers bent on committing suicide constitute a radical new departure , dangerous because they are impossible to prevent .
But that is a myth , like the many others in which terrorism has always been shrouded .
The bomber willing and indeed eager to blow himself up has appeared in all eras and cultural traditions , espousing politics ranging from the leftism of the Baader - Meinhof Gang in 1970s Germany to rightist extremism .
When the Japanese military wanted kamikaze pilots at the end of World War II , thousands of volunteers rushed to offer themselves .
The young Arab bombers on Jerusalem buses looking to be rewarded by the virgins in Paradise are a link in an old chain .
State -sponsored terrorism has not disappeared .
Terrorists can no longer count on the Soviet Union and its Eastern European allies , but it is clear that among Middle Eastern and North African countries , some will definitely provide support .
Tehran and Tripoli are less eager to argue that they have a divine right to engage in terrorist operations outside their borders .
Indeed , the 1986 U.S. air strike against Libya and the various boycotts against Libya and Iran had an effect .
On the other hand , Sudan , without fanfare , has become for terrorists what the Barbary Coast was for pirates of another age : a safe haven .
Politically isolated and presiding over a disastrous economy , the military government in Khartoum , backed by Muslim leaders , believes that no one wants to become involved in Sudan and thus it can get away with lending support to terrorists from many nations .
Such confidence is justified so long as terrorism is only a nuisance .
But when it becomes more than that , both terrorists and their protectors come under great international pressure .
Nevertheless , the past few decades have witnessed the birth of dozens of aggressive movements espousing varieties of nationalism , religious fundamentalism , fascism and apocalyptic millenarianism , from Hindu nationalists in India to neofascists in Europe and the developing world to the Branch - Davidian cult of Waco , Texas .
The earlier fascists believed in military aggression and engaged in a huge military buildup , but such a strategy has become too expensive even for superpowers .
Now , mail-order catalogs tempt militants with readily available , far cheaper , unconventional as well as conventional weapons -- `` the poor man 's nuclear bomb , '' as former Iranian President Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani once called them .
In addition to nuclear arms , the weapons of mass destruction include biological agents and man-made chemical compounds that attack the nervous system , skin or blood .
Governments have engaged in the production of chemical weapons for almost a century and in the production of nuclear and biological weapons for many decades , during which time proliferation has been continuous and access ever easier .
The means of delivery -- ballistic missiles , cruise missiles and aerosols -- have also become far more effective .
While in the past missiles were deployed only in wars between states , recently they have played a role in civil wars in Afghanistan and Yemen .
Use by terrorist groups is but one step further .
Until the 1970s most observers believed that stolen nuclear material constituted the greatest threat in the escalation of terrorist weapons , but many now think the danger is elsewhere .
Terrorist groups have investigated the use of poisons since the 19th century .
The Aum Shinrikyo cult staged a poison gas attack in March 1995 in the Tokyo subway .
Exposure to the nerve gas sarin killed ten people and injured 5,000 .
Other , more amateurish attempts in the United States and abroad to experiment with chemical substances and biological agents for use in terrorism have involved the toxin that causes botulism , the poisonous protein rycin -LRB- twice -RRB- , sarin -LRB- twice -RRB- , bubonic plague bacteria , typhoid bacteria , hydrogen cyanide , Vx -LRB- another nerve gas -RRB- , and possibly the Ebola virus .
Chemical agents are not so easy to keep safely in stable condition , and their dispersal depends largely on climatic factors .
The risk of contamination for the people handling them is high .
Many of the most lethal bacteria and spores do not survive well outside the laboratory .
Furthermore , traditional terrorism rests on the heroic gesture , on the willingness to sacrifice one 's own life as proof of one 's idealism .
Obviously there is not much heroism in spreading botulism or anthrax .
Since most terrorist groups are as interested in publicity as in violence , and as publicity for a mass poisoning or nuclear bombing would be far more unfavorable than for a focused conventional attack , only terrorists who do not care about publicity will even consider the applications of unconventional weapons .
Broadly speaking , terrorists will not engage in overkill if their traditional weapons -- the submachine gun and the conventional bomb -- are sufficient to continue the struggle and achieve their aims .
But the decision to use terrorist violence is not always a rational one .
If it were , there would be much less terrorism , since terrorist activity seldom achieves its aims .
What if , after years of armed struggle and the loss of many of their militants , terrorist groups see no progress ?
Despair could lead to giving up the armed struggle , or to suicide .
But it might also lead to a last desperate attempt to defeat the hated enemy by arms not tried before .
As one of Racine 's heroes said of himself , their `` only hope lies in their despair . ''
-LRB- Walter Laqueur , chairman of the International Research Council at the Center for Strategic and International Studies , is the author of `` Terrorism and Guerrilla . ''
This article is adapted from a longer version in the September/October ` 96 issue of Foreign Affairs . -RRB-
_______
