TOKYO --
The Aum Shinrikyo doomsday cult said Tuesday for the first time that its founder and leader , Shoko Asahara , was probably involved in the fatal nerve gas attack on the Tokyo subway system in 1995 and other criminal acts .
The religious group distanced itself from Asahara and said that he would no longer serve as its leader , but that its members would continue to follow his spiritual teachings .
Asahara is on trial for masterminding the sarin gas attack in March 1995 that killed 12 people and injured 5,000 others .
`` Although we cannot say for sure , since the trial is still going on , we have come to a consensus that Asahara was likely involved in the series of crimes he is charged with , '' the group 's senior members said in a statement .
But the members avoided addressing the question of their own complicity in the crimes .
Many ordinary Japanese regarded the reorganization announced by the cult Tuesday as largely cosmetic , and expressed skepticism that it would be any less dangerous .
The cult was widely seen as trying to evade new legislation that would allow the government to curb its activities .
Indeed , the group 's own statement went on to assert that `` Asahara is a genius in yoga and Buddhist meditation methods and we will continue to practice those methods inherited from him . ''
In addition to the subway attack , Asahara , 44 , is also on trial for 16 other crimes , including murder , attempted murder , a separate nerve gas attack and production of weapons .
The religious cult also announced a series of what it called `` drastic reforms , '' including changing part of its name from Aum to Aleph , which is the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet , and purging itself of teachings that condoned murder for the benefit of the cult .
Aleph , which the cult members said signifies renewal , is also the name of a company affiliated with the cult , which is believed to have about 2,100 followers .
Fumihiro Joyu , the group 's former spokesman and now its second highest official , apologized to victims of the crimes linked to Aum and said that the cult would raise money to compensate them through the sale of real estate and other assets .
`` I 'd like to give a deep apology to the victims and bereaved , and say that I feel personally responsible as one who belonged to the same religious group , '' said Joyu , 37 , who returned to the cult last month after serving a three-year jail term for perjury .
While Joyu is widely seen as the cult 's de facto leader , the religious group said Tuesday that its acting head Tatsuko Muraoka , 49 , would immediately assume the leadership mantle .
Ms. Muraoka said in a statement Tuesday that the cult still considered Asahara as `` a spiritual being '' but that he no longer had the authority to direct cult members .
She said that all followers had been instructed to abandon any dogma considered dangerous and that the new group would pose `` no threat to society . ''
By dismissing Asahara as its leader and undertaking a broad restructuring , the religious cult is hoping to stave off a move by the government to closely restrict the group 's activities and finances .
In November , Japan passed legislation that gives its security forces broad powers to monitor and curtail the activities of organizations that have committed `` indiscriminate mass murder '' and those whose leaders hold strong influence over its members .
The laws allow the security forces and police to inspect such a group 's facilities at any time and make it easier for victims of crimes committed by the group to gain compensation .
While the legislation did not mention Aum by name , lawmakers said it was specifically aimed at the religious cult .
`` Aum knows that it cannot escape the introduction of the new law and this is their way of trying to avoid it , '' said Shoko Egawa , a freelance journalist who is known for her coverage of Aum .
`` Externally , they may have changed their name , but internally everything is the same .
They are meditating to Asahara , '' said Ms. Egawa , whose friend , a lawyer who had sought to convince followers to leave the cult , was slain by Aum members .
Justice Minister Hideo Usui said in an interview with reporters that the government would `` carefully watch '' the cult 's activities to determine whether the reforms were intended to escape the application of the new laws .
The legislation came in response to growing public concerns in Japan over Aum 's increasing membership and commercial activities in the past year .
As the group acquired new buildings to accommodate followers and operations across Japan , local residents and municipal governments held protests and refused to allow cult members to register as city residents , in an effort to drive them away .
Television news programs Tuesday night showed citizens protest groups camped outside Aum facilities .
The groups said that they still considered the cult dangerous and vowed to continue their protests .
`` Nothing has changed except for the name , '' said a woman in Otawara , a farming village 80 miles north of Tokyo , where residents have staged huge protests outside an Aum residence .
Kenji Utsunomiya , who heads a group of lawyers representing victims of the subway attack , said that unless the cult `` severs itself from Asahara and his teachings , we ca n't trust them . ''
Utsunomiya said that the cult had not yet fully disclosed all its assets , which he contends should be used to pay the claims of victims and their relatives .
