Philadelphia Officer Shot Dead, Second Officer Wounded
Police Say Officer Called For Backup After Car Stop
Last Edited: Tuesday, 23 Sep 2008, 10:05 PM EDT
Created: Tuesday, 23 Sep 2008, 1:58 PM EDT

Philadelphia Police Officer Patrick McDonald, 30, was fatally shot.

SideBar

Related Items
Links
Slideshow: Officers Shot
Videos
 
 
 
 
 
Pictures
 
 

PHILADELPHIA  --  One Philadelphia Highway Patrol officer was shot dead and a second officer was wounded Tuesday afternoon when a chase and gun battle followed an apparent car stop in North Philadelphia.

Police confirmed that one suspect was also shot dead in the exchange of gunfire that occurred around 1:45 p.m. near the 2200 block of North Colorado Street.

Slideshow: Images From Shooting Scene | Videos: Aerial Footage From SkyFox | Nutter Addresses Media | Police: Officer Called For Backup | Police Looking For Woman

Officer Patrick McDonald, 30, was shot in the chest, rushed to Temple University Hospital in critical condition and later died, authorities said.

Officer Richard Bowes, 35, was struck in the hip and reported to be in stable condition.

Deputy Police Commissioner Richard Ross said the details of the shooting are sketchy, but McDonald called for backup Tuesday afternoon to the 2100 block of Bouvier Street.

Fox 29's Dave Schratwieser reported that McDonald apparently stopped a late-model, burgundy Buick occupied by a man and a woman, whom the officer was questioning. When the man took off running, McDonald gave chase, got into an altercation with the man and was struck by multiple bullets.

Police are questioning one woman who witnessed the shooting, but officers are also on the lookout for the woman who drove off in the Buick, Schratwieser reported.

Ross said officers responding to McDonald's backup call spotted a man running toward them on the 2200 block of North Colorado Street and gave chase. Bose exchanged gunfire with the man at Colorado and Dauphin streets and was shot.

The suspect then ran to the 2300 block of North 17th Street, where he fell and died of his wounds, Ross said.

The first officers at the scene could not see McDonald and did not initially know what had happened to him, Ross said.

The officer, who was single, was pronounced dead at 2:08 p.m.

"We're just lucky it wasn't two officers, but we're saddened today because, once again, we lost one of our own, and it's too much or too many in a short span of time," Ross said.

Bowes is a 12-year force veteran and married father of three, Ross said.

The highway patrol typically works high-crime areas, and that's what they were doing Tuesday. McDonald was on patrol by himself, Ross said. Several of the responding officers were on motorcycles, suggesting that they may have been in court earlier in the day.

A .40-caliber, semi-automatic weapon was recovered after the shooting.

Sources said the suspect -- whom authorities are not yet identifying -- was previously arrested for beating up four police officers. He was out on parole at the time of Tuesday's shooting, and police may have been looking for him in recent weeks, Schratwieser reported.

"Well unfortunately, as everyone knows, we have seen another incident of tragic violence here in Philadelphia," Mayor Michael Nutter said outside the hospital. "Officer McDonald was shot down today -- an eight-year veteran of the Philadelphia Police Department, 30 years old -- out doing his job, trying to protect the citizens of this city. Another officer, Officer Bowes, was shot during the course of the same incident, shot in the leg. We believe that he will be fine."

The shooting came 11 days after police buried another officer killed in the line of duty, and McDonald is the fourth to lose his life in less than a year.

After listing the names of other fallen officers, Nutter said, "We are deeply saddened. We are hurt. We are in pain and we are very angry about what is going on here in our city. We will not stand for it, and we will protect our officers every step along the way.

"... We cannot continue this kind of activity and behavior in this city," the mayor continued. "I do not know what is going on in the minds of some of these individuals out here. When they come upon a Philadelphia police officer somehow they believe that they can engage in gun fights with us. We will pursue suspects. We will pursue them aggressively. We will continue our efforts to make this a safe city. ... We will not stop, and I ask all the citizens of Philadelphia to pour out your hearts and wrap your arms around these families who are experiencing this violence, especially the family Officer McDonald. Keep Officer Bowes in your prayers," Nutter said.

At 5:45 p.m., a procession began with a full police escort, taking McDonald's body to the coroner's office.

Stay tuned to Fox 29 News and MyFoxPhilly.com for more on this breaking news story. For the latest updates, use this link: http://www.myfoxphilly.com/myfox/pages/ContentDetail?contentId=7494923
