Philly officer's killer was paroled in August
By Patrick Walters | The Associated Press
12:36 PM EDT, September 24, 2008

PHILADELPHIA - 

A man who fatally shot a police officer after a traffic stop was paroled last month 


and had a warrant out for his arrest for fighting with police 


about a week after his release from state prison.


Daniel Giddings, 27, was fatally shot by police on Tuesday afternoon


 after he shot and killed Officer Patrick McDonald, investigators said.


Giddings was paroled from the state prison in Frackville on Aug. 18 


after serving time for an October 1998 robbery and aggravated assault


, according to officials and court records. 


He was sent to a halfway house in Philadelphia, 


but fled from there on Aug. 25, said Susan McNaughton


, a spokeswoman the state Department of Corrections.


Two days later, 


he was involved in an assault on four officers 


inside a home following a traffic stop in North Philadelphia


, police said. 


Philadelphia police issued a warrant for his arrest on Aug. 27.



"Obviously, he wasn't rehabilitated. The guy was a thug. He was a criminal

," 


Police Commissioner Charles Ramsey said Wednesday.



Gidding had served 10 years out of maximum 12-year sentence, Ramsey said.


"It's just a very, very dangerous individual who demonstrated 


that over and over and over again


, yet he did not complete his full sentence," Ramsey said.



Police on Wednesday released more details about what set off Tuesday afternoon's violence.

Gidding was a passenger in a car that McDonald had pulled over, police said. After McDonald approached the car, Giddings bolted.

McDonald called for backup and then was shot in the chest by Gidding. Richard Bowes, one of several officers to respond to McDonald's call, exchanged fire with Gidding and fatally shot him.

Bowes, 35, was shot in the leg and was expected to recover. District Attorney Lynne Abraham issued a statement Wednesday in which she said Bowes was justified in shooting Giddings.

McDonald, 30, was the son of a retired Philadelphia Fire Department captain. He was single and had no children.

Homicides in Philadelphia are currently down more than 20 percent for the year, 

with 240 reported Tuesday, compared with 303 at that time last year, 

according to the department.

But on-duty deaths of police officers have been on the rise, 

with five killed over the past three years.

In May 2006, Officer Gary Skerski became the first officer slain in the line of duty in Philadelphia in a decade when he was shot responding to a robbery at a bar.

On Oct. 31, 2007, Officer Chuck Cassidy was shot in the head as he walked in on a doughnut shop robbery; he died the next day.

In May, Officer Stephen Liczbinski, 39, was fatally shot responding to a bank robbery.

Earlier this month, Officer Isabel Nazario was killed during a vehicle pursuit when the patrol car in which she was riding was broadsided by a teenager driving a stolen SUV.

