MOSCOW
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Japan 's Foreign Minister Masahiko Komura focused Saturday on a World War II peace treaty with Russia , a document the two countries never signed because of a territorial dispute .
Komura met in Moscow with Russian Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov and later Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov .
The peace treaty hinges on solving a dispute over the Kuril Islands , seized by the Soviet Union at the end of the war off Russia 's Pacific coast .
President Boris Yeltsin has promised a treaty will be signed by 2000 .
At the start of his meeting with Komura , Primakov said Russia `` will stand firm by the positions laid out by Yeltsin and ex- Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto , '' the Interfax news agency reported .
Diplomatic efforts in preparation for Komura 's visit `` will allow us to come closer to a peace treaty , '' Primakov said .
Primakov said he was grateful to Japan for its support of Russia 's economic reforms , and accepted an invitation to visit Japan .
Komura 's talks with Ivanov also touched on Kosovo , Afghanistan and the Korean peninsula , Russian news agencies reported .
The two also agreed on a date for a summit between Yeltsin and Japanese Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi , to be held Nov. 10-13 .
It will be the first visit by a Japanese premier to the Russian capital in 25 years , Interfax said .
There have been no signs of progress on resolving the Kurils disagreement , despite an overall improvement in relations .
Moscow insists a decision on the Kurils must not threaten its national interests .
Japan has been cautious about investment and economic cooperation with Russia -- key areas that Komura 's talks Saturday were expected to address -- because of lack of movement in the dispute .
Still , in an interview published Friday , Komura said Russian - Japanese relations have warmed because of summits between Yeltsin and Hashimoto .
`` In Russian - Japanese relations ... there has been a continuous dialogue on a high level , '' Komura told the daily Nezavisimaya Gazeta .
Komura arrived in Russia on Friday night , and leaves Saturday .
He was also scheduled to meet Saturday with First Deputy Premier Yuri Maslyukov , in charge of economic ties with Japan , and Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov , a likely candidate in Russia 's next presidential elections .
Komura 's spokesman , Masaki Okada , said Saturday he was surprised that Russia 's parliament had voted Thursday to reinstate a holiday marking the defeat of Japan in World War II , Interfax said .
The holiday had been dropped after the 1991 Soviet collapse .
The measure requires Yeltsin 's signature to become law .
Also Saturday , Japan delivered more than dlrs 500,000 in medical aid to Russia 's Sakhalin island , and said it would supply small generators , flashlights and candles for a town on one of the Kuril Islands without electricity because of fires , the ITAR - Tass news agency reported .
-LRB- adc/ji -RRB-
