MOSCOW
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Russian and Japanese leaders signed a `` Moscow Declaration '' on Friday in which they pledged to seek an end to their 53-year -old dispute over the Kuril islands by the end of next year .
If they succeed , it would mean that Russia and Japan could formally end World War II before the end of the 20th century .
The dispute over ownership of the tiny islands has stopped the two countries from ever signing a formal peace treaty .
The declaration signed by prime ministers Keizo Obuchi of Japan and Yevgeny Primakov of Russia gives no hint of how the conflict might be resolved , but sets up a new mechanism -- and a new resolve -- for doing it .
The declaration was signed at the outset of talks between the two premiers that were otherwise expected to focus on the details of when and how Japan will hand over an dlrs 800 million installment on a loan it promised last summer .
On Thursday , Obuchi and Russian President Boris Yeltsin `` exchanged views from broad and lofty perspectives , '' as Obuchi 's spokesman put it , in the first formal visit by a Japanese prime minister to the Russian capital in 25 years .
The spokesman , Sadaaki Numata , observed that it was `` not the sort of discussion that might take place between bankers . ''
That sort of talk was reserved for Friday 's meeting between Obuchi and Primakov .
While the subject of the disputed islands loomed over the talks , the leaders were also expected to work out the timing and logistics of Japan 's loan , the ITAR - Tass news agency reported .
The money is part of a dlrs 22.6 billion bailout package arranged by the International Monetary Fund this summer .
Both the IMF and the World Bank put their loans on hold after Russia effectively defaulted on foreign loans at the outset of its economic crisis in August .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">In addition to agreeing to free up the loan , Obuchi has offered to give Russia dlrs 100 million to promote economic development on the Kuril islands , dlrs 10 million to medical assistance and dlrs 20 million to support youth exchange programs .</ENAMEX>
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The two prime ministers were expected to sign a spate of agreements , including one on guarantees of capital investments that is expected to pave the way for large-scale Japanese investment in Russia , ITAR - Tass said .</ENAMEX>
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">They also were expected to sign memorandums on cooperation in tourism , transport , mail and telecommunications , as well as support for Russia 's and medium-size companies .</ENAMEX>
Relations between the two countries have long been clouded by the Kuril dispute .
Tokyo claimed title to the islands -- Etorofu , Kunashiri , Shikotan and the Habomai islets -- in a treaty with Russia in 1875 .
The Soviet Union took them back in the closing days of World War II , a move Japan has protested ever since as illegal .
The islands have only about 17,000 poor and restive Russian residents , many of whom would welcome Japanese administration .
The Kurils are important to both countries for symbolic reasons and because they are surrounded by prime fishing waters .
-LRB- ml/gm -RRB-
