MOSCOW
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Japanese Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi 's trip to Moscow produced a Russian promise to work toward speedy settlement of a 53-year -old territorial dispute -- and a Japanese promise to give Russia nearly a billion dollars in aid and loans .</ENAMEX>
Obuchi and Russian President Boris Yeltsin signed an agreement released Friday in which they pledged to resolve their differences over the Kuril islands by the end of next year .
A settlement would pave the way for the two countries to finally end World War II .
The dispute over ownership of the tiny islands has stopped them from ever signing a formal peace treaty .
The declaration gave no hint of how the conflict might be settled but set up a new mechanism -- and a new resolve -- for doing it .
`` I think we have made significant progress at this meeting , '' Obuchi said at a news conference before he left Friday .
`` It is necessary to expand cooperation , while creating conditions for concluding a peace treaty and resolving the territorial question . ''
The declaration was issued at the outset of talks between Obuchi and Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov on Friday .
The two had been expected to focus on the details of when and how Japan will hand over an dlrs 800 million installment of a loan it promised last summer .
`` All of us gained something , '' said Yeltsin 's spokesman , Dmitry Yakushkin .
There was no immediate indication that the loan details had been resolved .
The Japanese loan is part of a dlrs 22.6 billion bailout package arranged by the International Monetary Fund this summer .
The IMF and the World Bank put their loans on hold after Russia effectively defaulted on foreign loans at the outset of its economic crisis in August .
Obuchi , who arrived in Moscow on Nov. 11 , offered to free up the Japanese loan and give Russia another dlrs 100 million to promote economic development on the Kuril islands , dlrs 10 million to medical assistance and dlrs 20 million to support youth exchange programs .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The two prime ministers signed an agreement on guarantees of capital investments and on a joint investment company that would promote direct investments in Russia by Japanese companies .</ENAMEX>
Relations between the two countries have long been clouded by the Kuril dispute .
Tokyo claimed title to the islands -- Etorofu , Kunashiri , Shikotan and the Habomai islets -- in a treaty with Russia in 1875 .
The Soviet Union took them back in the closing days of World War II , a move Japan has protested ever since as illegal .
The islands have only about 17,000 poor and restive residents , nearly all Russians , many of whom would welcome Japanese administration .
The Kurils are important to both countries for symbolic reasons and because they are surrounded by prime fishing waters .
