MOSCOW
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
The Russian and Japanese foreign ministers on Saturday resumed negotiations over a decades -old territorial dispute that has prevented them from concluding a World War II peace treaty .
President Boris Yeltsin has pledged that a treaty will be signed by 2000 , but first Russia and Japan must come to an accord over the Kuril Islands , which the Soviet Union seized from Japan at the end of the war .
The dispute over the islands off Russia 's Pacific coast `` should be settled without damaging Russia 's sovereignty and territorial integrity , '' Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov told reporters after meeting with his Japanese counterpart Masahiko Komura , the Interfax news agency reported .
Ivanov said that many points in the peace treaty had already been agreed on or were `` in an advanced stage , '' Interfax reported .
He was quoted as saying that `` the territorial question was obviously discussed as an integral part of a peace treaty , '' and denied that there had been any talk of Russia 's `` trading '' territory in return for Japanese economic aid .
The two foreign ministers agreed on a date for a summit between Yeltsin and Japanese Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi , to be held Nov. 10-13 .
It will be the first visit by a Japanese premier to the Russian capital in 25 years , Interfax said .
Russia 's chief of staff is due to visit Japan next month , and Russian and Japanese police officials will meet in Moscow in December , Ivanov said .
He said that Russia supported a Japanese initiative to hold a six-nation conference on a settlement on Korea , which would include representatives from both North and South Korea .
Komura also met with Russian Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov , who expressed gratitude to Japan for its support of Russia 's economic reforms , and accepted an invitation to visit Japan .
The two also discussed the long-delayed peace treaty .
There have been no signs of progress on resolving the Kurils disagreement , despite an overall improvement in Russo - Japanese relations .
Moscow insists a decision on the Kurils must not threaten its national interests .
Japan has been cautious about investment and economic cooperation with Russia because of lack of movement in the dispute .
Komura 's spokesman , Masaki Okada , said Saturday he was surprised that Russia 's parliament had voted Thursday to reinstate a holiday marking the defeat of Japan in World War II , Interfax said .
The holiday had been dropped after the 1991 Soviet collapse .
The measure requires Yeltsin 's signature to become law .
Also Saturday , Japan delivered more than dlrs 500,000 in medical aid to Russia 's Sakhalin island , and said it would supply small generators , flashlights and candles for a town on one of the Kuril Islands without electricity because of fires , the ITAR - Tass news agency reported .
-LRB- pvs/ji -RRB-
