BOGOTA , Colombia
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Badly strained relations between Colombia and the United States received a boost with the election of Andres Pastrana as president , but guerrillas and an economy in tatters will test the new leader 's much-questioned abilities .
Pastrana , a 44-year -old former mayor of Bogota , told foreign reporters Monday that with his election , ties with the United States `` will now begin to change . ''
He wants to `` open the agenda to include topics other than drugs , '' Pastrana said .
The Conservative Party challenger beat ruling Liberal Party candidate Horacio Serpa in a runoff vote Sunday characterized by one of the best voter turnouts in memory .
Pastrana received 50 percent of the vote , to 46 percent for Serpa .
`` We think there is a very good chance that the United States and Colombia can turn over a new page in its relationship and work more successfully in the fight against narcotics trafficking and other matters , '' State Department spokesman James Rubin said Monday in Washington .
The United States refrained from publicly endorsing either candidate in Sunday 's runoff , but U.S. administration officials said privately that a Pastrana victory would augur much better for relations .
Serpa , 55 , was interior minister under outgoing President Ernesto Samper , whose four-year tenure was crippled by allegations his 1994 campaign took dlrs 6 million from the Cali drug cartel .
Serpa vigorously defended his boss , called the U.S. ambassador to Bogota `` a nasty gringo , '' and at one point implied the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration might have been involved in a 1995 attempt to assassinate Samper 's lawyer .
Pastrana , on the other hand , has lived and studied in the United States , speaks fluent English and promises a new relationship based on strong business ties .
But his detractors question his leadership ability and grasp of the issues .
Son of the late president Misael Pastrana , Pastrana made his public debut as a news anchor in his family 's TV station .
He was criticized for leaving the country and disappearing from public life after losing the presidential race to Samper in 1994 and disclosing the winner 's alleged drug links .
Pastrana , who takes office Aug. 7 , inherits a nation mired in crises .
Violence by leftist rebels and paramilitary death squads has soared -- along with interest rates , unemployment and the fiscal deficit .
Concerned about Colombia 's deteriorating security situation , the United States this year lifted economic sanctions imposed for two years because of dissatisfaction with Samper 's drug policies .
In 1996 , Washington revoked Samper 's U.S. visa .
Pastrana 's election , aside from breathing new life into the relationship , could lead to a more coherent policy toward Colombia , said Michael Shifter , senior fellow at the Interamerican Dialogue in Washington .
According to Shifter , that policy has been marred by mixed signals .
Some Washington policy-makers have demanded more respect for human rights , while others called for more aid to the military .
And though the lines between anti-narcotics aid and anti-insurgency assistance are blurred , the United States tried to fashion a policy that ostensibly separated them .
And even as officials tried to marginalize Samper , they congratulated his successful police chief , Gen. Rosso Jose Serrano .
`` This was a highly personalized policy .
Samper was the bad guy and Serrano was the good guy ... and this sends contradictory signals , '' Shifter said .
`` I suspect that with the Pastrana administration , all this will change . ''
Pastrana is calling for a `` Marshall Plan '' to invest in education , health , housing and infrastructure in the Colombian countryside , where guerrillas have gained ground .
He said the United States and other countries should play a role in this plan and in making peace with the rebels , which he said will be a top priority .
