BERN , Switzerland
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Switzerland has ordered the confiscation of some dlrs 114 million in accounts belonging to the brother of former Mexican President Carlos Salinas de Gortari , the country 's federal prosecutor said Tuesday .
The brother , Raul Salinas de Gortari , is in prison in Mexico pending completion of trials in Mexico in a political assassination and on a charge of illegal enrichment during his brother 's administration .
Swiss Federal Prosecutor Carla del Ponte said the funds in the accounts , of which Raul Salinas is a co-owner , came partly from protection payoffs .
The Swiss discontinued their own proceedings on charges of money laundering against Raul Salinas and three co-defendants , but prosecutor 's said the findings of a 2 1/2 year investigation `` inevitably suggest money laundering '' of drug profits .
Del Ponte told a news conference Switzerland could not itself try Salinas as he is imprisoned in Mexico .
His lawyers can appeal the decision , taken Monday , within ten days .
That would send the case to Switzerland 's supreme court , but Del Ponte said she was `` very confident '' it would uphold the seizure .
Most of the money -- dlrs 89.9 million -- ordered confiscated is in Swiss bank accounts .
But the office is also requesting that Britain seize dlrs 24.5 million administered by a Swiss -based financial institution in London .
Salinas has denied any links to drug traffickers and said the money in the Swiss accounts was an investment fund pooled by several wealthy friends .
Del Ponte 's office countered that his business dealings `` are for all practical purposes unsound and incomprehensible and contrary to customary business usage . ''
Prosecutors maintain that Salinas used his influence and protected large-scale shipments through Mexico from Colombia to the United States .
`` With all his contacts and his power , he could guarantee protection for those loads , '' said Valentin Roschacher , who led the Swiss investigation .
Witnesses spoke of `` green light days '' on which , following agreement between drug traffickers and corrupt officials , drugs could be transported through Mexico on certain routes , he added .
Many testified that he had received hundreds of million of dollars in payoffs from Colombian and Mexican drug cartels between 1988 and 1994 , when his brother was president , Roschacher said .
Among them were members of Colombia 's Medellin and Cali drug cartels , Del Ponte added .
The investigation concluded Raul Salinas `` had close personal and business relationships both with Colombian and Mexican drug dealers and with Mexican justice and administration officials , '' Roschacher said .
His contacts with drug traffickers started in the 1980s and became more intense in the early 1990s , he continued .
Swiss authorities did not release the full police report into Salinas .
Both Del Ponte and Roschacher declined to say whether investigations had shown Carlos Salinas to be involved with drug money .
Del Ponte said a Swiss criminal case was no longer necessary as Mexican authorities have started their own proceedings against Raul Salinas and others on charges of money laundering and facilitating drug trafficking .
Authorities seized his Swiss bank accounts in 1995 .
Salinas is in prison pending completion of his trials on charges of masterminding the 1994 murder of political rival Jose Francisco Ruiz Masseiu , and of illicit enrichment while he held a midlevel government post in his brother 's administration .
No drug-related charges have been brought against Raul Salinas , but he was acquitted of money laundering on a technicality .
His brother , who moved to Ireland shortly after leaving office , has been charged with no crime .
