BOGOTA , Colombia
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
The seizure in the United States of a Colombian air force plane stocked with over a ton of cocaine is another blot for a military already beleaguered by leftist rebels and human rights investigations .
The incident is also an embarrassment for President Andres Pastrana , who has assured the United States he will strengthen Colombia 's commitment against drug trafficking .
Colombia 's air force commander resigned Tuesday after U.S. customs authorities found 1,639 pounds -LRB- 743 kilograms -RRB- of cocaine in the cargo compartments of a Colombian air force C -130 Hercules that landed Monday at Fort Lauderdale 's international airport on a weekly supply run to pick up military equipment .
Pastrana accepted the resignation of Gen. Jose Manuel Sandoval , though no arrests or criminal charges have been announced .
U.S. and Colombian officials said the incident was unlikely to affect relations , which improved dramatically after Pastrana took office in August , replacing Ernesto Samper .
The United States revoked Samper 's visa in 1996 , convinced he knowingly accepted dlrs 6 million in campaign contributions from the Cali drug cartel .
By contrast , U.S. officials hailed Pastrana 's election as a new opportunity for cooperation with the country that supplies over 80 percent of the cocaine sold in the United States .
In Colombia , the incident was seen as the latest symptom of a military in decay .
`` There has been a moral deteroriation of huge proportions with the Colombian armed forces , '' said Javeriana University political scientist Andres Franco .
`` This deserves a more profound discussion , much more than the rhetoric saying that heads should roll . ''
The discovery of cocaine in the air force plane could be the just a small fraction of the criminal activity within the Colombian security forces .
`` If this is what we know , what do n't we know ? '' he said .
Two weeks ago , news leaked that a former army colonel who headed a now-disbanded army intelligence unit was wanted for planning the 1995 assassination of a top conservative leader .
Four soldiers are already under arrest in the killing of Alvaro Gomez .
Numerous other investigations have linked the army to Colombia 's feared paramilitary groups -- right-wing death squads who massacre civilians suspected of collaborating with rebels .
Military leaders are also struggling to explain their faltering performance against the rebels , who now control about one-third of the country .
The guerrillas , who held a remote state capital for three days last month , have been piling up military victories since 1996 and now hold nearly 300 soldiers and police prisoner .
The armed forces chief , Gen. Fernando Tapias , was grilled in Congress on Tuesday by lawmakers demanding explanations for both the air force incident and the army 's mounting losses .
This week 's scandal is n't the first implicating Colombia 's 12,000-member air force in drug trafficking .
In the most embarrassing incident , Colombian authorities found 8 pounds -LRB- 3.6 kilograms -RRB- of heroin in the nose and luggage compartment of then- President Ernesto Samper 's official airplane .
Three former air force mechanics were convicted last week of stashing the drugs on the plane , which was getting ready to take Samper to the U.N. General Assembly in New York .
