EL SAUZAL , Mexico
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Gunmen apparently sent by a drug lord yanked three families from their beds before dawn Thursday , lined them up against a wall and killed at least 19 men , women and children near a popular Baja California resort .
At least one man was seriously wounded .
Police have a witness in protective custody , a 15-year -old girl who hid under a bed during the slaughter , The Associated Press has learned .
The attorney general of Baja California state , Marco Antonio de la Fuente Virrarreal , said the head of one of the households grew marijuana for the Arellano Felix drug-smuggling gang , the government news agency Notimex reported .
He said the man , Fermin Castro , oversaw the Arellano Felix 's marijuana plantations nearby .
Castro was n't killed in the attack , but was in very serious condition with a bullet wound to the head , health officials said .
Police said the attack took place at 4 : 30 a.m. in El Sauzal , a suburb of the resort town of Ensenada , a popular beach destination for Californians that 's only a 1 1/2-hour drive from San Diego .
The victims appeared to be asleep when the gunmen showed up ; most of the bodies were wearing pajamas -- or nothing at all -- and the beds in at least one of the houses were unmade , as if sleeping people had been pulled from them .
Television images showed the victims lined up in a pool of blood in front of a wall .
A television reporter said one woman was clutching a baby in her arms ; both were dead .
The director of the Red Cross in Ensenada , Eugenio Carrillo , said the victims were the residents of three neighboring houses .
He said the dead included nine adults , two teen-agers , six children and a baby .
A 15-year -old girl hid under a bed and escaped notice by the attackers , and police were questioning her about what she saw , a judicial police officer told the AP on condition of anonymity .
He did not elaborate and the report could not be confirmed independently .
Children 's toys littered the yard outside one house , according to the television footage .
The yard was filled with broken glass and chairs were overturned on the porch , indicating a struggle .
Turkeys cackled in the yard .
Dozens of bullet casings surrounded the bodies , and the Televisa television network said most were from a Kalashnikov assault weapon , although some were from smaller-caliber weapons and shotguns .
Ensenada Judicial Police officer Jose Ramon Espinoza said the victims were members of three families : the Flores family and two families that both had the last name Castro .
It was unclear whether the three families were related .
`` It appears they rounded them all up , lined them up and gunned them down , '' Espinoza said .
He said he had no information on suspects or a possible motive .
The drug gang led by the Arellano Felix brothers is based in Tijuana , 60 miles -LRB- 100 kilometers -RRB- to the north .
The brothers , once known for the violence with which they controlled their territory , had recently been settling into a quieter , more businesslike style after making themselves famous for shootouts in broad daylight .
But Mexican authorities suspect the Arellano Felix brothers were behind the slaying of a rival last week in Ciudad Juarez , just across the border from El Paso , Texas .
Rafael Munoz Talavera , considered a front-runner to succeed deceased Juarez cartel leader Amado Carrillo Fuentes , was found shot to death in the back seat of an armored Jeep Cherokee .
Analysts said the killing might signal a shift back to the violence of the past .
