BOGOTA , Colombia
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- The words were surprising , coming from the hard-nosed general who has for years been Washington 's trusted point man in the war on drugs in Colombia .
Even more so , as legislation advances in the U.S. Congress to give this Andean nation about $ 1 billion more in counternarcotics funds , most of it for military training and hardware .
During a two-hour interview Wednesday with The Associated Press , national police chief Gen. Rosso Jose Serrano said international counter-drug efforts should focus as much on stemming drug abuse in the United States and Europe as destroying drug laboratories and crops in Colombia .
Just such an effort to divert funds to domestic drug treatment programs was rejected by the Senate on Wednesday .
`` We 'd rather see drug consumption drop than get any of this aid , '' said Serrano , 57 , who turns in his badge Friday after 5&frac12 ; years heading one of the world 's most embattled police forces .
`` If consumption were seriously reduced , '' he added , `` this country could go back to what it once was , a place that grew coffee , where people worked hard and sweated for a paycheck . ''
Instead , Colombia is a nation with a deepening guerrilla conflict , spiraling drug production , and whose wealthy are taking their families and money abroad .
In a wood-paneled office in the intelligence headquarters he calls his `` little CIA , '' the man U.S. officials herald as one of the drug war 's greatest heroes reflected frankly on that struggle 's limitations .
Serrano showed a sensitive , contemplative side rarely seen during a career that brought him fame , national devotion -- and little semblance of a normal life .
`` I have n't been out to a movie theater in 10 years , '' said Serrano , joking and looking relaxed in a smart gray suit -- a switch from his usual green uniform .
Serrano even acknowledged a curiosity about the cocaine he 's dedicated his life to eliminating .
`` I 've thought why do n't I snort some myself , if it makes you feel so great ? ''
The general is stepping down just as Washington embarks on a new -- some say perilous -- phase in efforts to stem the flow of drugs from this nation that produces 90 percent of the world 's cocaine and a growing share of its heroin .
The U.S. funds would finance a Colombian military push into rebel-held southern jungles , paving the way for stepped-up efforts to fumigate drug crops and destroy laboratories .
Serrano , who initiated aerial crop destruction as chief of the police anti-narcotics division in the early 1990s , says he welcomes the U.S. aid package because it will send a tough message to drug traffickers .
But he cautions that the U.S. assistance may serve only to drive traffickers to neighboring countries .
While faithfully implementing the U.S -inspired fumigation policy , Serrano sees his main accomplishments elsewhere .
Serrano purged the police of more than 11,000 corrupt officers and in 1995 dismantled the Cali cocaine cartel , which had corrupted Colombia 's political class to the core .
While failing to dent the outflow of cocaine and heroin , the Cali cartel 's downfall sent drug mafiosos underground , and splintered the trade into smaller less violent gangs .
In October , Serrano came through again , arresting 30 suspected members of a major cocaine gang wanted by U.S. authorities .
Serrano said he was up all night before Operation Millennium , nervously watching television in bed , concerned his men would fail to capture key `` narcos '' already named in news releases drafted in Washington .
The general readily credits the CIA and U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration for intelligence , training and money critical to many successful operations .
DEA and CIA agents were usually by his side in the most high-profile arrests , he said .
Serrano 's critics say he put the U.S. counterdrug agenda above Colombia 's critical need for more street cops and a push to combat the world 's highest kidnapping rate .
He admits that rural Colombia has become more lawless .
Politics may well be in Serrano 's future , but he says all he wants now is a long vacation .
`` I want to take a bit of a break from drug-trafficking , deaths and so much pressure .
I do n't want to abuse my good luck , '' he said .
