In an arrest that could end the seven-year investigation into the execution-style killing of a crusading antidrug journalist in New York City , the police in Colombia on Saturday captured a man who has been considered a major figure in the slaying .
According to accounts published in newspapers in Colombia , the police arrested Guillermo Leon Restrepo Gaviria in a wealthy neighborhood known as El Poblado in the city of Medellin .
Restrepo is wanted in the United States by federal prosecutors in the killing of the journalist , Manuel de Dios Unanue , who was shot in March 1992 while eating in a Queens restaurant .
De Dios , who was 48 , had written several exposes about the Cali drug cartel for two Spanish -language magazines he published in New York , Crimen and Cambio 21 .
De Dios was also a former editor of El Diario - La Prensa , the largest Spanish -language newspaper in New York .
Investigators said de Dios ' articles in the magazines enraged the former leader of the cartel , Jose Santacruz Londono , who ordered Restrepo to arrange the murder and offered to pay him $ 50,000 .
Prosecutors believe Restrepo contacted cartel members in New York to plot the shooting .
Six people in the United States were convicted in the attack .
Five of them confessed to participating in the plot to kill de Dios .
One of those who confessed , John Harold Mena , said he was the first person Restrepo contacted to plan the killing .
Mena became a leading witness for the prosecution in the case and avoided a life sentence .
In October 1996 , he was sentenced to 18 years in prison .
Two years after de Dios was killed , a 19-year -old Colombian immigrant who prosecutors said was the gunman in the killing , Wilson Alejandro Mejia Velez , was convicted and sentenced to life in prison .
Londono , known in Colombia as `` Mil Rostros , '' or `` A Thousand Faces , '' was shot to death in a 1996 gunfight with the police on a darkened highway outside Medellin .
Restrepo evaded law enforcement officers until Saturday .
For the last two months , Colombian agents had been following him as part of an investigation into money laundering .
According to reports in the Colombian newspaper El Tiempo , Restrepo was arrested by agents as he arrived in the commercial center of El Poblado for a meeting .
`` We have been actively seeking to apprehend him , '' said Eric Friedberg , an assistant U.S. attorney in Brooklyn , who was the chief prosecutor in the de Dios case .
`` He is the final and perhaps the most significant piece of the puzzle that we began putting together five years ago . ''
Friedberg said he had evidence that after de Dios ' slaying , Restrepo ordered the deaths of four people related to Mena , the chief witness in the case .
Friedberg said that his office would probably request that Restrepo be extradited to the United States to stand trial for the killing of de Dios .
In 1997 , the Colombian government reinstated its extradition treaty with the United States , but the treaty is not retroactive and does not apply to the warrant filed for Restrepo 's arrest in the killing of de Dios .
