CIUDAD JUAREZ , Mexico --
It 's a chilling sign that greets visitors to this desert ranch where U.S. and Mexican authorities suspect drug traffickers tortured , executed and buried victims .
`` Hidden Treasure Field , '' the billboard advertises cheerfully , right next to a shooting range and horse ranch that could contain the remains of dozens of people killed by drug traffickers in this tough city on the northern Mexican border .
On Tuesday -- in an unusually cooperative binational operation -- about 65 agents of the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation joined Mexican authorities in an effort to find the dead by painstakingly excavating the ranch near Ciudad Juarez .
Acting on a tip from an informer arrested in El Paso , Texas , investigators began searching Monday on the ranch and three other sites in this area .
They are reportedly looking for the remains of some 100 people who have disappeared from Juarez and El Paso , just across the Rio Grande .
Relatives of missing persons in this area say a total of at least 208 people have vanished or been kidnapped .
Juarez , a gritty factory town drenched in dust and heat , has been gripped by a series of killings of women factory workers as well as internecine warfare among drug traffickers .
As many as 22 Americans could be among bodies reportedly buried in clandestine graves outside Juarez , a smuggling haven , authorities said Tuesday .
`` We believe these people were killed for their knowledge or for being witnesses to drug trafficking endeavors , '' Assistant FBI Director Thomas Pickard said in Washington on Tuesday .
`` Most of the information we have shows these individuals were buried there at least two to three years ago , so it 's not a recent situation . ''
President Clinton said of the grisly find , `` It 's a horrible example , apparently , of excesses of the drug dealing cartels in Mexico .
And I think it reinforces the imperative of our not only trying to protect our border but to work with the Mexican authorities to try to combat these -LRB- traffickers -RRB- . ''
At the deserted ranch , investigators had a backhoe delivered on Tuesday and they clustered around a cement barn next to some empty horse stables .
Mexican Army troops and masked Mexican federal police guarded the ranch , situated along a main highway about three miles outside Juarez .
Authorities appeared to be surveying the property and at least one trained dog roamed the site .
None of the officials inside the gated ranch would speak to reporters , but at a press conference in El Paso , Mexican and U.S. officials said they said did n't yet have a firm idea of how many bodies -- if any -- were buried at the sites identified by the informant .
`` We have found some remains , '' said Jose Larrieta Carrasco , the head of the Mexican Attorney General 's organized crime unit , who was in El Paso .
`` They could be human remains . ''
Larrieta Carrasco declined to reveal the other places where authorities are looking for bodies , using sophisticated forensic techniques like those employed to unearth victims of ethnic cleansing in Kosovo .
David Alba , special agent-in-charge of the El Paso FBI office said the 65 FBI employees are working with Mexican officials in two different groups .
`` This is a Mexican investigation , '' Alba said .
He also said that investigators are not searching for missing Drug Enforcement Administration or FBI agents , as was initially reported in some news accounts .
News of the possible mass graves quickly spread among the families of people said to have disappeared in Juarez and El Paso since 1993 .
At the ranch , Ramon Alonso clutched a copy of a local newspaper story about his brother , Jose Alonso , missing for nearly two years .
He finally pushed it through the white and gold-painted gates surrounding the ranch in an attempt to get officials to listen to his story .
`` There 's been so much impunity in Juarez , nobody pays attention to us , '' Ramon said , describing how his brother , a Juarez mechanic , went off with two men to do a job for them and never returned .
Alonso said the men that he believes abducted his brother were dressed like plain-clothed police officers .
Noticeably missing from the search for bodies are local Juarez police and Chihuahua state judicial police .
Local authorities were apparently left in the dark about the operation , which Mexican Attorney General Jorge Madrazo described as part of a growing relationship between Mexican authorities and the FBI to solve the many disappearances in this border region .
The Juarez police have often been linked to drug traffickers , including the notorious Juarez cartel , which used to be one of Mexico 's most powerful smuggling rings .
The cartel began to splinter after its leader Amado Carrillo Fuentes died during plastic surgery and liposuction in 1997 .
Juarez was hit with a barrage of gunfights and killings as traffickers fought for control of the lucrative market .
If bodies are found in the excavations , some may be those of people murdered in such feuds .
But others may belong to police informants or aides , or to other innocent people who have vanished .
Full excavation and identification of any remains found may take weeks or months to complete .
In El Paso , Jaime Hervella , the president of a group representing the families of people who have disappeared , said the FBI has called at least two families asking them to provide dental records of their loved ones .
`` It 's a mix of emotions , '' he said `` I think -LRB- the families -RRB- are in a position like me , not knowing how to react . ''
Hervella said they have spent two and a half years badgering Mexican authorities to investigate the disappearances , but their pleas fell on deaf ears .
Hervella formed the group , called the Association of Relatives and Friends of Missing Persons , in 1997 , three years after his godson , Saul Sanchez Jr. , disappeared along with his wife in Juarez .
Some of those who disappeared were working with Mexican or American Police , Hervella said .
Sanchez designed and sold sophisticated listening devices to Mexican police .
One of the devices helped them seize a large load of narcotics , Hervella said .
In Albuquerque , N.M. , Leandra Pfieffer set out Tuesday for El Paso , hoping to learn the fate of her son Ricardo Pfieffer , a 35-year -old realtor who was abducted at gunpoint from his Juarez home in 1996 .
Leandra Pfieffer said the kidnappers called her demanding $ 250,000 ransom , and threatening to deliver her son in pieces if the family did not pay .
She said they did not have the money .
They have not heard from the kidnappers or her son since then .
`` I think they killed him , or he would have called me , '' she said , `` I have n't slept , just thinking , ` Is my son there ? ' ''
ENDIT
