BOGOTA , Colombia --
Almost every day , it seems , there is some piece of bad news to lower spirits and raise fears here .
If it is n't one guerrilla group attacking on the outskirts of the capital , it is another hijacking a plane or blowing up the country 's main oil pipeline .
If it is n't unemployment rising to an all-time high , it is the peso plunging to a record low against the dollar .
On Monday , the government of President Andres Pastrana and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia , the Marxist guerrilla group known to Colombians as FARC , are scheduled to begin formal peace negotiations aimed at ending 35 years of civil conflict .
But a rapidly deteriorating political and economic situation has weakened Pastrana 's hand going into the talks , undermining prospects for peace and emboldening the rebels .
Thanks to huge profits from the drug trade and kidnappings , the country 's two main guerrilla groups , as well as the right-wing paramilitary death squads that combat them , are better armed than ever , and control nearly half the territory of a country larger than Texas .
A rebel offensive the week before last , launched from a Switzerland -sized demilitarized zone that Pastrana handed over to the Revolutionary Armed Forces last November as a gesture of good faith , forced the government to impose a limited curfew in 10 of Colombia 's 32 provinces .
`` It 's the guerrillas who have taken the reins and are running the country , not the government , '' complained Ana de Alvarez , a 65-year -old widow living on a pension .
`` The president is a Boy Scout , too much a nice guy for his own good and ours .
I hate to say this , because I voted for him and am a staunch Conservative , but we need someone with a firm hand to impose order and put an end to this horrible insecurity . ''
A bitter joke making the rounds has two voters trying to remember why they did not cast their ballots for Pastrana 's Liberal Party opponent in last year 's election .
`` It was because we were afraid that he would run the economy into the ground and hand the country over to the guerrillas , '' one remarks to the other .
In Bogota , home to 7 million of the country 's nearly 40 million people , residents are especially shaken by last weekend 's offensive by the rebels , which demonstrated that the group has the ability to strike , if only briefly , uncomfortably close to the city .
Though FARC controls much of southeastern Colombia , that area is sparsely populated , and the group has traditionally avoided campaigns against urban areas .
`` On top of everything else , now we have to live with the constant fear that those bandits can invade at any moment , '' Jesus Rojas , a jeweler , said .
`` We have lost the tranquillity that we had before as residents of Bogota . ''
After sounding the alarm about rebel gains , the armed forces reversed course , with Gen. Fernando Tapias , the commander in chief , boasting that his troops inflicted a `` resounding defeat '' on the rebels , who , he said , lost nearly 300 fighters .
But the popular impression is still that momentum remains with the guerrillas , who have enjoyed a string of military successes over the last four years .
`` It 's like a soccer game in which you are losing 4 to 0 , '' said Alfredo Rangel Suarez , a former government national security adviser .
`` You may score a goal late in the second half , but that does n't mean that the game is tied . ''
In the past , even when the battles against guerrillas and cocaine cartels were going badly , Colombians could brag about an economic performance remarkable by Latin American standards .
Through the 1980s and into the 1990s , as countries like Brazil and Mexico struggled with debt negotiations and austerity , the economy here was growing at an average of 4.5 percent a year .
But Colombia is now experiencing what officials describe as its most severe economic crisis in 70 years , a result of low prices for exports , high domestic interest rates and drastic budgets cuts .
Figures announced last week show that the economy contracted by nearly 6 percent in the first quarter of 1999 , the largest decline in history , and that unemployment has risen to just under 20 percent , another unenviable record .
`` It is hard to get a strong position politically when you are in the midst of an unprecedented recession , '' said Michael Shifter , a professor of Latin American politics at Georgetown University and author of an article on the crisis here in the current issue of Foreign Affairs .
`` Colombians are used to dealing with violence and drugs , but a bad economy has thrown a whole new element into the situation and accelerated the downward spiral . ''
Since taking office , Pastrana has twice had to devalue the peso .
But the Colombian currency continues to slide , reaching a record low of 1,925 to the dollar on Monday , down more than 35 percent in the last year , in large part because of market nervousness about guerrilla advances .
What is worse , the economy does not yet appear to have hit bottom , and political uncertainty is keeping away the foreign investment that might help ease the crisis .
`` Very difficult days lie ahead in which it will be necessary to act with realism and without fantasies , '' Minister of Finance Juan Camilo Restrepo warned on Thursday when he announced that Colombia had begun negotiating a $ 3 billion credit from the International Monetary Fund .
A U.S. official with long experience here said , `` There are no jobs anywhere for people with skills and education , and so now you 're seeing people , not just capital , trying to leave the country . ''
Every sector of the Colombian economy is suffering , but analysts are most concerned with the decline of agriculture , weakened by an earthquake in the heart of the coffee-growing zone in January and low prices for crops .
`` The worse that things are for the peasants , the more they are at the mercy of the guerrillas and the more the guerrillas grow , '' said Maria Jimena Duzan , a journalist and author who specializes in military and drug issues .
The deterioration is also souring Colombia 's relations with its neighbors .
President Alberto Fujimori of Peru , for instance , ordered troops to the Peru - Colombia border after the rebels began their latest offensive , and has been anything but diplomatic in criticizing Pastrana 's carrot-and-stick approach .
`` If all of this process of terrorist advances continues , I do not have the slightest doubt '' that Colombia `` can constitute a threat to the continent , '' the Peruvian leader said in an interview with the Bogota daily El Espectador .
His government 's policy , he added , is that `` we do not give in to blackmail , we 're not willing to have any kind of contact or dialogue with terrorists . ''
Though the United States has publicly expressed support for Pastrana and his peace efforts , there is growing concern in Washington that , as a U.S. official put it , Pastrana `` is giving away the store . ''
A report on Colombia by the Government Accounting Office last month quoted the U.S. Embassy here as complaining that the Pastrana administration `` lacks a clearly defined negotiating strategy . ''
As polls here clearly indicate , most Colombians agree .
They excoriate Pastrana for failing to demand a cease-fire as a condition for peace talks , and the vast majority , nearly 90 percent in one recent survey , say that because the rebel group is more concerned with maintaining its economic and military power , the negotiations beginning Monday are doomed to failure .
`` It 's not that Colombians do n't want peace , because they do , desperately , '' Ms. Duzan said .
`` But everyone is confused .
No one can tell if we are at war or at peace right now , and so the president ca n't get the support he needs to sell his peace project , and the country is getting more and more polarized . ''
