NEW YORK --
Officials at the U.S. Justice Department said Monday that they would not ask the Colombian government to extradite a prisoner suspected of plotting the 1992 murder of a journalist in Queens County .
Guillermo Leon Restrepo Gaviria , a former leader of the Cali drug cartel who was arrested Saturday in Colombia , is wanted in the United States for helping to plan the killing of Manuel de Dios Unanue , who had written several exposes about drug trafficking for two Spanish -language magazines in New York .
De Dios , 48 , was shot to death in 1992 while dining at a restaurant in Elmhurst , N.Y. Six people in the United States have been convicted in the murder .
The gunman , Alejandro Mejia Velez , was 17 when he shot de Dios .
Restrepo is the last person wanted by U.S. officials in connection with the murder .
Investigators accused him of making calls to contacts in New York to order the killing with an offer of $ 50,000 .
Investigators also accuse Restrepo of ordering the murders of witnesses ' relatives .
In explaining the decision not to extradite Restrepo , John Russell , a spokesman for the Justice Department , said that the extradition treaty that the United States negotiated with Colombia in 1997 is not retroactive .
`` The treaty does not apply to Restrepo , '' Russell said .
Colombian officials said that Restrepo has been charged with illegal enrichment and remains in custody in Bogota , where he faces 4 to 12 years in prison if convicted .
Relatives and friends of de Dios said such a penalty would be too light .
Victoria Sanchez , the mother of his 9-year -old daughter , challenged the Justice Department 's decision .
`` I know the extradition treaty may not apply to this case , '' she said , `` but if the Justice Department really wanted to , they could extradite Restrepo .
I guess they do n't feel Restrepo is big enough of a fish for them to really pressure the Colombian government . ''
In a telephone interview from her home in Puerto Rico , Ms. Sanchez added , `` Even though the Colombian government may want to apply justice , it is very hard for them .
But the United States makes people pay for their crimes . ''
Restrepo 's arrest in Medellin sparked intense debate over U.S. extradition policies among Hispanic journalists in New York .
Some repeated Ms. Sanchez 's argument that justice systems in many Latin American countries are rife with corruption and lack the political strength to impose strong punishments on drug traffickers .
But others said that de Dios probably would have supported the U.S. Justice Department 's decision .
`` Manuel was vehemently opposed to the extradition efforts by the United States , because he felt they violated the sovereignty of other nations , '' said Rossana Rosado , the editor-in-chief of El Diario La Prensa .
`` He was bitterly criticized for those views . ''
Ms. Rosado , whose newspaper is the largest Spanish -language daily in New York , considers herself one of de Dios ' protegees .
She was the metropolitan editor of El Diario when de Dios was the editor in chief .
She said she planned to write about de Dios ' feelings on extradition in tomorrow 's issue .
`` On one hand , of course I want to see Restrepo extradited so that he can be punished for putting a contract on Manuel 's life , '' she said .
`` But on the other hand , I must remind people that Manuel was vehemently opposed to extradition , and we ca n't conveniently ignore his beliefs . ''
