BOGOTA , Colombia --
In an attack that revived nightmare memories of the Medellin cartel 's terror campaign a decade ago , a car bomb exploded Thursday in an upscale neighborhood here , killing at least seven people and injuring 51 , authorities said .
Initial suspicion fell on the country 's major drug smugglers , reeling with the Supreme Court 's order this week to extradite two accused traffickers .
Hours after the bombing , President Andres Pastrana 's government signed the papers for the country 's first extraditions to the United States since 1990 .
`` We still do n't have any proof that it was narcoterrorism , but the certain thing is that the Colombian society is n't going to be intimidated by violent acts , '' Mayor Enrique Penalosa said from the bomb site shortly after the explosion .
Authorities offered a $ 250,000 reward for information into the attack .
Police said the bomb -- packed with more than 170 pounds of explosives -- exploded in a red Mazda truck at 10 : 15 a.m. , killing and injuring passersby and shattering windows throughout the neighborhood of Pepe Sierra , a district of apartment buildings , restaurants , shops , and galleries .
The attack stunned the capital , which had been targeted in a bombing , assassination , and kidnapping campaign led by Medellin cartel leader Pablo Escobar during the 1980s and early 1990s .
Escobar died from police gunfire in 1993 .
Since Escobar 's death , the capital has been rife with street crime but largely insulated from the years of rural -based and paramilitary-related violence .
The campaigns have been so deadly and disruptive to the nation 's struggling democracy that several US political leaders have pushed for billions of dollars in US military and humanitarian aid .
Amid the shattered glass of nearby stores , onlookers feared the blast was the start of another campaign of so-called narcoterrorism .
`` Perhaps there wo n't be another bomb here , but maybe in -LRB- upscale shopping mall -RRB- Hacienda Santa Barbara or maybe in the Unicentro Mall , '' said Marco Aurelio Castro , a tailor who had been shortening a pair of blue jeans at his sewing machine when the bomb exploded across the street .
`` I felt as if I 'd been hit hard in the chest , and then the whole window caved in on top of me . ''
Lying on the floor , he thought that guerrillas or traffickers had to be behind the attack .
`` It 's logical , '' he said .
`` It 's always one or the other . ''
The bombing campaign in the early 1990s came because Escobar and his colleagues in the Colombian narcotrafficking underworld sought to pressure the government to change a law that permitted the extradition of suspects for trial overseas .
They were particularly doubtful of their chances in the hands of US justice and even developed a motto for their deadly campaign : Better a grave in Colombia than a jail in the United States .
They called themselves The Extraditables , killing politicians and security officials and kidnapping members of the small , aristocratic political class .
They destroyed the El Espectador newspaper office and downed an Avianca flight from Bogota to Cali , killing all 107 people aboard .
Caving into the violence , the Colombian government dropped the extradition law from its 1991 constitution .
But following pressure from the United States , the Colombian Congress reinstated the law in December 1997 .
Earlier this week , the country 's highest court approved the extradition of Fernando Jose Flores and Jaime Orlando Lara , who are both wanted in the United States for alleged drug smuggling .
Justice Minister Romulo Gonzalez , whose signature is required to send Colombian defendants overseas , said Thursday that if the drug-trafficking community turns out to be responsible for the crime , the government will keep the word of the President of the Republic to extradite all the narcotraffickers .
But Gonzalez was hesitant to lay the blame at the feet of the narcotraffickers so quickly .
`` At this moment we ca n't accuse narcoterrorism because people in Colombia take advantage of many circumstances to commit violent acts , '' he said .
Officials at the US Embassy in Bogota said several dozen suspects currently in Colombian prisons could be extradited to the United States .
Among them : Fabio Ochoa , one of the Medellin cartel founders , who was arrested last month along in an international string dubbed Operation Millennium .
The lack of extraditions from Colombia , the world 's leading exporter of cocaine and a growing source of heroin , has been an issue of contention between the two countries , said US officials .
After the bombing , police tape cordoned several blocks of the normally bustling neighborhood , and the prevailing sound resembled the tinkling of dozens of giant windchimes -- glass being chipped from windows throughout the neighborhood and swept into piles .
One woman was plucking sharp twists of metal from the glass that covered the sidewalks .
`` They 're from the car , '' she insisted .
`` Evidence . ''
