WASHINGTON --
A Colombian accused of running a major heroin smuggling ring was bundled aboard an American government plane in Colombia on Sunday and flown to the United States .
It is the first time in nearly a decade that Colombia has turned over one of its own citizens to stand trial in this country .
The Clinton administration hailed the extradition of the 30-year -old suspect , Jaime Orlando Lara , the first of 42 drug suspects being held in Colombian jails awaiting transfer to the United States .
But it almost certainly means new turmoil for Colombia , the source of most of the cocaine sold on American streets and a fast-growing exporter of heroin to the United States as well .
Colombian drug cartels appear to be beginning a new wave of terrorist attacks in protest over the resumption of extraditions of drug trafficking suspects to the United States .
Two weeks ago , a car bomb killed eight people and wounded scores of others in a fashionable shopping district of Bogota , the capital .
The police there said it was a final warning against the extradition of Lara and the others .
Similar violence by the drug traffickers led the Colombian government to halt extraditions in 1991 ; the last one before Sunday 's occurred in 1990 .
President Andres Pastrana , who has won praise from the Clinton administration as well as large American aid commitments for his willingness to crack down on the drug trade since he took office last year , defiantly signed Lara 's extradition order only hours after the deadly bombing .
`` President Pastrana must be commended for his courage and dedication , '' said Gen. Barry McCaffrey , the White House director of drug control policy .
`` Actions such as today 's extradition to confront the traffickers will send a powerful and helpful signal . ''
Terry Parham , the chief spokesman for the Drug Enforcement Administration , said that Lara was `` a big deal as far as being a major trafficker '' but that `` the bigger deal is the resumption of the extradition process '' by Colombia .
`` This is very positive for law enforcement , '' he said .
Pastrana has formally authorized the extradition of two other suspects wanted in the United States on drug trafficking charges : a Cuban , Bravilo Gonzalez , and a Venezuelan , Fernando Jose Flores .
Prosecutors hope that Flores will prove to be a valuable witness against the leadership of the now-defunct Cali cocaine cartel .
Lara , who was flown initially from Bogota to Ft .
Laundedale on the way to New York , is wanted by federal prosecutors in Manhattan on charges that he conspired to smuggle large amounts of heroin into the United States and distribute it here .
Law enforcement officials have charged that at one point his family-run smuggling ring exported 25 pounds of heroin a week into the United States through distribution points in New York , Houston and Miami , usually by hiding it in commercial airliners , sometimes in passengers ' luggage .
Lara 's two sisters were arrested in the United States earlier this year .
Colombian police spokesmen were quoted in Bogota as saying Lara was in handcuffs on Sunday morning when he was placed aboard a twin-engine Cessna plane owned by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration .
The spokesmen said the heavily guarded suspect , dressed in jeans and sneakers , had not said a word as he walked the 60 feet across the tarmac to the plane .
Acting on an American request , the Colombian police captured Lara in Bogota last December .
American law enforcement officials say he fled the United States in July after his sisters were arrested by the Drug Enforcement Administration .
Immigration records , the officials say , show that he left Colombia 29 times between August 1991 and July of last year .
The Clinton administration is piecing together a major economic and military aid package for Colombia intended to support Pastrana 's government as it struggles with a thriving drug trade , a leftist guerrilla insurgency , right-wing paramilitary forces fighting the guerrillas and an economic crisis .
But the aid package , worth as much as $ 1.5 billion over the next three years , is inducing reservations even among some in the administration , who fear that the United States is being drawn too deeply into a civil conflict that has left tens of thousands of Colombians dead in the last four decades .
But administration officials say they are desperate to find a way to stem the flood of Colombia cocaine -- as well as heroin that is transshipped through Colombia -- into the United States .
The CIA estimated last year that Colombia might have produced as much as 188 tons of cocaine from its own crop , up from 88 tons in 1995 .
