GIBRALTAR
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- <ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Everywhere you turn on this big British rock , ancient cannons face the Spanish mainland .
No shots have been fired for generations , but the 300-year sovereignty dispute over the colony is still very much alive .</ENAMEX>
The latest flap began in January when Spanish fishermen accused Gibraltar of violating access rights around the rock , a 2 1/2-square-mile promontory that juts out from the Spanish shore .
Madrid and London traded insults and threats and Spain clamped down on its border crossing controls , threatening even tougher measures to isolate the tiny colony .
London tabloids stoked British pride over the dispute and a few members of Parliament demanded the immediate dispatch of warships .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Matters calmed a bit after a meeting of foreign ministers on Feb. 21 , but Spain has pledged a new pressure campaign and still wants to retrieve Gibraltar</ENAMEX> .
Towering at 1,300 feet over the western entrance to the Mediterranean , Gibraltar has always loomed large in history .
It was one of Hercules ' mythical pillars , the target of countless battles and sieges between European and Arab powers and a crucial British naval post during two world wars .
At the threshold of the 21st century , Gibraltar 's military value is diminishing .
But the sovereignty issue is still capable of setting Britain and Spain at each other 's throat .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Under the Treaty of Utrecht , Spain ceded Gibraltar to England in 1713 but retained first preference should London ever disown it .
With Britain shedding its colonies , Spain is pushing that prerogative .
But on the limestone rock , the 30,000 Gibraltarians abhor the idea of being ruled by Spain , which has laid siege to the colony more than a dozen times since 1713 .</ENAMEX>
The late Spanish dictator Gen. Francisco Franco blocked overland entry to the rock for 13 years beginning in 1969 .
The measure split families and caused job losses .
Democratic Spain has not been much friendlier , periodically imposing border controls and refusing virtually all official cooperation with the rock .
Gibraltar accuses Spain of ignoring the will of the colony 's citizens .
In a 1967 referendum , 12,000 Gibraltarians voted to retain British ties while just 44 people favored joining Spain .
`` People here feel very strongly British . ...
There 's no desire to break off constitutional links and still less in any deal with Spain , '' said Gibraltar 's Chief Minister , Peter Caruana .
Britain 's position is that it cannot alter Gibraltar 's status against the wishes of the rock 's inhabitants .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Most rock residents say they feel Gibraltarian , not British or Spanish , but admit they have more in common with their Spanish neighbors across the narrow isthmus that constitutes the frontier than with their British compatriots thousands of miles to the north .</ENAMEX>
`` The problem is we magnify our differences and choose to ignore what unites us , '' said a resident who gave his name as Jesus , 60 , a Spanish -born Gibraltarian who has lived on the rock for 40 years .
While replete with distinctly English -style bars and fish and chip shops , Gibraltar has no agriculture or manufacturing .
Almost everything is imported from or via Spain .
Spanish is the dominant language , even among its English bobby-style police officers .
Heated arguments over Spanish soccer teams are as common here as anywhere on the Iberian peninsula .
But one main difference is economic .
Once totally dependent on British aid as a military garrison , Gibraltar has become a thriving duty-free tourist town and an offshore financial haven .
Wages are double those in Spain and prices on many items are half as much .
The economic success contrasts with the poverty of nearby Spanish port towns .
Some in Spain complain that Gibraltar also profits from money laundering and drug trafficking .
Earlier this month , Spanish Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar presented his British counterpart , Tony Blair , with a report documenting Spanish seizures of Gibraltar -based yachts and other vessels found transporting drugs under the cover of murky shell companies operating in the colony .
All sides give lip service to favoring dialogue , but talks have been largely fruitless .
Madrid has insisted on dealing only with London , while Gibraltar has demanded an equal say in its future .
`` Spain demands to talk to the organ grinder not the monkey , but it 's got to realize that the decisions on Gibraltar 's future will come from Gibraltar and not from London , '' said Paul Preston , a professor of Spanish studies at the London School of Economics and author of several books on Spain .
Like many , Preston believes Gibraltar has no choice but to do business with Spain , but he believes Madrid must first make a lucrative offer .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Spain 's latest proposal is shared sovereignty , with gradual incorporation into Spain , but with strong Gibraltar self-government and the right for its citizens to British nationality .
At the latest talks , however , the mention of Spanish sovereignty brought an outright rejection from Gibraltar .</ENAMEX>
