DALLAS
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Exxon Mobil Corp. said it is negotiating to drop a lawsuit that threatens the $ 7 billion sale of Alaskan oil operations and the pending $ 30 billion merger between BP Amoco and Atlantic Richfield .
BP Amoco had thought it locked up government approval for the Arco merger when it announced last month that it was selling Arco 's Alaskan interests to Phillips Petroleum .
Regulators had wanted more divsersified ownership of Alaska 's North Slope oil fields .
But Exxon Mobil went to court to block the sale , claiming it held the right of first refusal , which BP Amoco disputes .
Tom Cirigliano , a spokesman for Irving , Texas -based Exxon Mobil , said Monday discussions are underway to resolve the lawsuit .
A BP Amoco spokesman in New York said the London -based company would have no comment .
BP Amoco operates about half the Prudhoe Bay oil field , with Arco operating the other half .
Exxon Mobil is a partner on both sides of the field , holding a 23.8 percent stake in oil production .
Federal and state regulators are pressuring BP Amoco to sell Arco 's Alaskan operations because , without such a sale , the new BP - Arco combination would control three-fourths of North Slope oil , which an important supply of gasoline for the West Coast .
Exxon Mobil is unhappy because it says it does n't know how the sale of Arco Alaska to Phillips will affect operations on the North Slope fields -- rules set by agreements that date to the 1960s .
`` We and the state -LRB- of Alaska -RRB- have not been informed as to the specifics of the agreement between BP Amoco , Arco and Phillips relative to the proposed merger and the sale of assets to Phillips , '' Cirigliano said .
Oil industry analysts believe Exxon is n't interested in buying Arco 's assets but was alarmed by suggestions from Phillips -- which has no experience on the North Slope -- that it would be a passive investor and let BP Amoco run the field .
Under such a scenario , analysts said , Exxon would have virtually no control over investment and production decisions , despite the fact it holds a 23.8 percent interest in the field .
`` Exxon becomes a passenger in the bus .
They ca n't tell the bus driver whether to go fast or slow , '' said Fadel Gheit , an analyst with Fahnestock & Co .
`` Exxon wants to be consulted on operational decisions . ''
Gheit blamed BP Amoco for underestimating Exxon Mobil 's resolve to be consulted about oil field operations .
`` I do n't think Exxon wants to operate the fields , '' said James Van Alen , an analyst with Janney Montgomery Scott Inc .
`` They want to make sure that their interests are taken care of . ''
Gheit , the Fahnestock analyst , said he expects a speedy settlement .
Exxon shares were down $ 1.31\ to $ 78.25 , BP Amoco shares down 6\ cents to $ 51.12 -LCB- , Arco shares were down 31\ cents to $ 82.25 , and Phillips shares were down 37 -LCB- cents to $ 45.68 -RCB- . All stocks trade on the New York Stock Exchange
