GIBRALTAR
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- <ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">A young lawyer who has overseen Gibraltar 's robust economic growth while cracking down on drug smugglers and fending off Spanish claims of sovereignty sought re-election Thursday as the British colony 's head of government</ENAMEX> .
Peter Caruana , a 43-year -old conservative , was ahead of his main rival , leftist Joe Bossano , in opinion polls in this quaint patch of Britain located at Spain 's southern tip .
Turnout was estimated at about 44 percent , compared to 49 percent in the last election , held in 1996 .
Both Caruana , whose title is chief minister , and Bossano , a 61-year -old former union boss , rule out giving in to Spain 's claims to the 2 1/2-square-mile chunk of limestone that looms over the isthmus that connect the Mediterranean to the Atlantic Ocean .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Spain ceded Gibraltar to Britain in 1713 under the Treaty of Utrecht , but now wants it back .
Britain says it cannot give up the territory because the majority of residents oppose joining Spain .</ENAMEX>
The territory largely controls its own internal affairs .
Britain appoints a governor and is responsible for defense and foreign affairs .
Gibraltar is not represented in the British Parliament .
Only one of the four candidates , Peter Cumming , favors any kind of accommodation with Spain and he was running last in opinion polls .
Caruana has run for re-election on the island 's vibrant economy , which has virtually no unemployment , thanks in large part to Gibraltar 's emergence as a duty-free tourist mecca and offshore financial center .
`` Gibraltar is experiencing a breath of fresh air , '' Caruana said as he cast his ballot .
Bossano , who served two terms as chief minister until he was unseated by Caruna four years ago , has accused the government of failing to share the wealth with middle and lower-class residents .
Outside the Gibraltar Senior Citizens Center on Thursday several voters accused Caruana point-blank of catering to business interests and the wealthy .
`` I think he is a bit of an actor , '' said Lisanne Davis , a 25-year -old housewife .
`` He promises many things but does not deliver . ''
