MELILLA , Spain --
Squinting in the hot sun , with dust swirling round his bare feet , Hamid Uld - Mohamed is the sort of young man who strikes fear into the hearts of many Europeans .
Born and raised in Mauritania , a poverty-ravaged country in western Africa , the slender 18-year -old now lives in a camp for migrants in Melilla , a Spanish port on the coast of North Africa .
Founded as a fort in the 1500s and expanded in recent decades , this small city borders Morocco , making it a front line between the European Union and the Third World .
Like thousands of migrants before him , like thousands more sure to come , Uld - Mohamed is here on a mission : to use Melilla as a springboard across the Mediterranean Sea to a shiny new life in the EU .
`` Even if you 're intelligent and hard-working , you have no chance to get anywhere in Africa , so going to Europe is your only hope , '' he says , swatting a fly on his neck .
`` Even if they put up electrified fences all along the borders of Europe , even if they put up the barriers of hell , people will keep on coming .
Europe can never keep us out . ''
To many Europeans -- the homemaker in Munich , the banker in Paris , the plumber in London -- his words are a harbinger of Armageddon , proof positive that Western Europe is in danger of being swamped by foreigners .
Like the southwestern United States , the European Union -- a political and economic alliance of 15 states -- is grappling with an immigration crisis .
Some experts think that as many as a million people fleeing poverty , war and persecution in the developing world could try to breach the EU 's external borders this year .
Migrants have been coming to Europe for decades .
But now , with nearly 17 million jobless citizens in the EU and social security systems bursting at the seams , many Europeans have lost the desire to play host to the world 's huddled masses .
Even as they struggle to make sense of the changes wrought by immigration in their societies , Europeans are hunkering down behind tighter entry rules , beefed-up border security and mounting xenophobia .
Analysts use the term `` Fortress Europe '' to describe the anti-immigration mood .
`` If you ask people whether they want any more immigrants to come here , they will shout , ` No !
No !
No ! ' '' says Patrick Weill , a scholar who helped draft immigration laws in France .
`` The trouble is that that in itself does not stop anyone coming , so we must learn to cope better . ''
While EU countries struggle to stanch the flow , the migrants keep on coming .
Again and again , they try to slip through borders on foot and by plane , in small boats , stowed away in car trunks and cargo ships , even clinging to the undersides of railway carriages .
Some pass through customs with real or fake tourist visas and then never leave .
Most migrants sell everything -- and risk life and limb -- to make the journey to Western Europe .
Many die in the attempt .
Aid agencies estimate that 1,000 people have drowned this year -- compared with 3,000 in all of the previous decade -- in the Straits of Gibraltar , the treacherous waterway between Morocco and Spain that is known as `` Europe 's Rio Grande . ''
But still they come .
Experts think that 200,000 to 400,000 people will sneak across the external borders of Fortress Europe and vanish into the underground economy this year .
Another 250,000 , some of whom will also cross the frontier illegally , are expected to join the queue for asylum .
As many as 4 million foreigners are now thought to be living illegally in the EU , compared with about 5 million in the United States .
Here in Melilla , Hamid Uld - Mohamed and 300 other men from all over Africa and the Middle East are crammed into La Granja , an abandoned farm used as a camp for migrants .
Their womenfolk and children are lodged in public housing scattered around the city .
Almost every day , more people arrive , seeking asylum or work permits .
Uld - Mohamed 's application for asylum was rejected by the Spanish government last July .
If his appeal fails , he plans to slip into continental Europe illegally .
If the authorities try to deport him back to Mauritania , he says , he will kill himself .
Such all-or-nothing desperation is common among migrants in the 1990s .
In Africa and the Middle East , in Asia and Eastern Europe , millions of people live in political and economic misery .
In the wired-up global village , everyone can see that the grass is much greener in the West .
Many people in the Third World dream of a new life in the United States , but colonial ties and geography often make Western Europe the first choice for a fresh start .
Besides creating millions of potential migrants , the breakup of the Soviet Union has spawned a patchwork of new travel routes leading to the EU 's eastern flank .
With few exceptions , border controls have slackened across the old communist bloc , largely because post- Soviet governments are too busy nation-building to worry about people fleeing westward .
Internal changes have also made the European Union -- which consists of Austria , Belgium , Denmark , Finland , France , Germany , Greece , Ireland , Italy , Luxembourg , Netherlands , Portugal , Spain , Sweden and the United Kingdom -- a more appealing destination .
Thanks to the Schengen agreement , border controls have been abolished within much of the EU , allowing travelers -- including illegal immigrants -- to roam more or less freely across the continent once they get past the external frontier .
At the same time , most of the world 's hot spots are closer to the European Union than to the United States .
Kosovo , the war-torn Serbian province that is home to thousands of displaced people , may seem remote to Americans , but it lies just 80 miles across the Adriatic Sea from Italy and 350 miles by land from Vienna .
Benkharroubi Benkhada is a refugee from the bloody civil war in Algeria , which sits across the Mediterranean from Spain 's Costa Dorada and France 's Cote d 'Azur .
The unemployed 25-year -old fled his hometown of Mascara when Islamic terrorists burned down the family house and murdered his brother , who was in the army .
He has been expelled twice from Melilla , but he is now back at La Granja camp .
-LRB- MORE -RRB- `` I will keep on coming here , 10 times , 20 times , whatever it takes , '' he says , picking at a scab on his right hand .
`` I will keep coming until Europe accepts me . ''
As the global financial crisis bites down , migrants are increasingly lured by the glitter of wealth in the EU .
Average wages in Western European nations are more than 10 times higher than those in neighboring countries , and the gap is even wider farther afield .
Morocco is a relatively peaceful democracy , but a recent poll there found that three of every four people have considered moving to Europe .
Modern technology helps promote the European dream across the globe .
In most countries along the fringe of the EU , any old TV set can pick up European channels with their ads for luxury goods and programs featuring beautiful people leading glamorous lives .
Every day , thousands of settled immigrants phone home reports of their success in Europe .
Back in Nouakchott , the capital of Mauritania , Uld - Mohamed grew up watching movies and soap operas from the West .
Earlier this year , when a teacher strike ended his schooling and a violent neighbor accused him -- wrongly , he says -- of impregnating the man 's daughter , the teen-ager decided to cut his losses and head for the wonderland depicted on the small screen .
`` We all grow up seeing Europe on TV and knowing that life is good for people there , '' he says .
`` Our parents tell us that our destiny is in Europe . ''
Media reports are sometimes a direct catalyst for migration toward the European Union .
Last year , a television station in Slovakia ran a documentary hinting that Britain 's social security system was a soft touch .
Within days , hundreds of Slovak Gypsies turned up at the White Cliffs of Dover claiming asylum .
Most migrants bound for the EU travel much farther than do Mexicans heading for the United States -- and usually with less chance of returning home to business as usual .
It took Uld - Mohamed nearly five months to reach Melilla from Mauritania .
Carrying only a few essentials in a bag and the clothes on his back , he traveled 1,500 miles across four African countries , working odd jobs along the way to pay for food and bus rides .
Twice he was beaten and robbed by local police .
By the time he reached La Granja , his camel-skin shoes were in tatters .
Going back is not really an option for the gentle youngster who dreams of being a graphics designer in Paris or Barcelona , Spain .
Like most migrants , he sold all his belongings to finance his trip to the promised land .
His school career is ruined , he says , and he has lost touch with his family , who moved to Burkina Faso or the Ivory Coast in search of work .
`` I have given up everything , '' he explains .
`` All that is left for me now is to find a way into Europe . ''
Uld - Mohamed knows that will not be easy .
Fewer than one in four applications for asylum in EU countries is accepted , and his case is far from watertight .
Nor is sneaking into Europe as easy as it once was .
Following the U.S. example , EU governments have been shoring up their external borders with extra police and high-tech gadgetry such as night-vision cameras and motion sensors .
Nowhere are the ramparts of Fortress Europe more evident than here in Melilla .
Called in last year after migrants rioted , the Spanish army is still helping local border police patrol the 6-mile-long land frontier with Morocco .
Sheltering from the North African sun beneath straw parasols , armed soldiers and police officers stand guard all along the border .
Jeeps and squad cars rumble through the midday heat .
Tanks stand at key junctions .
With help and encouragement from its EU partners , Spain is lining the border with a 16-foot buffer zone consisting of two barbed-wire fences separated by a paved road and topped with watch towers , sensors and cameras .
A similar barrier has been built in Ceuta , another Spanish enclave 150 miles west along the Moroccan coast .
Even as the Melilla project nears completion , though , most migrants here seem unfazed .
`` They 're wasting their money building this little Berlin Wall , '' says Uld - Mohamed .
`` A desperate man will find a way through any fence . ''
Indeed , if the U.S. experience proves anything , it is that tighter security does not seal a border .
Often , it just forces migrants into the arms of professional traffickers .
As in Mexico , the people-smuggling business is booming along the external borders of the European Union .
The trade in the region is estimated to be worth $ 2 billion to $ 4 billion annually , with prices per crossing ranging from $ 1,000 to $ 30,000 .
Nosing around the back streets of Melilla , Uld - Mohamed has been offered passage across the Mediterranean to Spain for $ 2,000 .
Even faster than their Mexican counterparts , experts say , EU trafficking gangs are evolving into a sophisticated branch of organized crime , schooled in cutting-edge technology and willing to use violence .
Often Europe -bound migrants get a poor deal .
Most EU traffickers demand cash up front , with no refund policy .
Many cheat their customers , dumping them outside Western Europe or handing them over to police as decoys while they sneak through other clients .
At the first sign of danger , traffickers often flee , leaving their human cargo to fend off arrest or worse .
At the seamier end of the trafficking industry , thousands of young women are sold into forced prostitution in red-light districts across the EU , experts say .
`` These traffickers are mafiosi involved in a highly lucrative business , '' says Philip Muus , a migration expert at the University of Utrecht in the Netherlands .
`` They do n't give a damn if people suffer or die . ''
Because most legal channels for immigration into the EU have been closed off , some traffickers advise their clients to claim asylum , even when they have no real case for refugee status .
Applications are down from their peak during the Balkan Wars of the early 1990s , when 4 million people sought refuge in Western Europe , but the numbers are rising again .
The EU expects to register 250,000 asylum applicants this year .
Many are genuine refugees fleeing persecution in places such as Kosovo and Iraq ; others are simply looking for a back door into Fortress Europe .
Uld - Mohamed knows his claim to refugee status is flimsy , but a Moroccan trafficker and a Spanish lawyer both urged him to file for asylum .
`` I wanted to be honest , to say that I have come to work , to do any job that they will give me , but I was told that claiming asylum was my best hope , '' he says .
`` My application was turned down in July , and now I 'm filing an appeal . ''
The apparent surge in bogus asylum-seekers has triggered a backlash .
Many Europeans no longer give `` refugees '' the benefit of the doubt , suspecting them instead of being con artists intent on stealing jobs and sponging off welfare .
`` With economic migrants posing as refugees , all asylum-seekers have been given a bad name , '' says Wolfgang Mueller , a German social worker .
`` They are the new bogeymen of Europe . ''
Despite recent streamlining , asylum procedures in many EU countries can take months to complete .
While waiting for a final verdict , thousands of applicants are caught in an invidious limbo , forbidden to work and forced to live off state benefits , which reinforces their image as freeloaders .
In many European towns and cities , asylum-seekers from the Balkans and beyond earn spare change by washing car windows at intersections and by panhandling on sidewalks .
Some turn to petty crime .
Many live in public housing or open camps , but more and more are held in detention centers .
The men in La Granja are allowed to go freely into Melilla , which is a welcome relief .
-LRB- MORE -RRB- Although the Spanish name of the camp means the farm , the land here is too dry and dusty even for a vegetable garden .
The original farm buildings are decrepit and crumbling .
Mangy dogs and cats scavenge among the abandoned cars , picking at the garbage that blows in the wind .
Many of the men live in tents made of gray tarpaulin stretched over scaffolding pipes .
Their bunk beds are covered with threadbare sheets .
Mosquitoes and flies hum in the air .
At night , rats scamper along the pipes overhead .
The heat can be stifling , and sometimes the men sleep outside .
`` Look at this place .
I mean , this is not the Four Seasons Hotel .
It is more like a prison , '' says Uld - Mohamed .
`` No one is here for a holiday .
We 're here because we have no choice . ''
Like the lead character in Franz Kafka 's novel `` The Trial , '' the men in La Granja are trapped in a legal maze .
They run round in circles , chasing documents and bureaucrats , never knowing when or how the law will decide their fate .
Documents are their only lifeline and thus take on a totemic importance .
In the hour before lunch , while Uld - Mohamed is sitting on his bunk , leafing through a stack of letters from state agencies , a commotion breaks out at the other end of the tent .
A burly Ghanaian is shouting at the top of his lungs at a small Iraqi , accusing him of meddling with his documents .
`` These are my papers , man .
Why did you touch my papers ?
Why did you touch my bloody papers ? ''
The Iraqi curls his shoulders in contrition and says nothing .
Uld - Mohamed sighs , as the barrage roars on .
`` Sometimes people cannot take the tension , and they explode , '' he says , turning his gaze back to his own documents .
`` You have to stay focused , or else you lose your mind here . ''
Like all aspiring immigrants , the men at La Granja cling to the hope that one day a piece of paper will arrive , granting them the right to live in the EU .
Yet the lucky few usually find cold comfort inside Fortress Europe .
Demographers argue that the EU needs immigration , because its population is aging and is in danger of shrinking .
Some advocate a U.S. -style quota system , which would allow Western Europe to choose a set number of useful immigrants every year from different countries .
Despite high unemployment , most European countries have programs that admit temporary workers to do the jobs , from street sweeping to farm labor , that native citizens no longer want .
More than a million foreigners are expected to secure legal residence in the EU in 1998 , mainly to rejoin families already settled there .
Nevertheless , polls suggest that a majority of Europeans , believing their countries to be too crowded already , would prefer to yank up the drawbridge and halt the inflow altogether .
EU governments and social groups are trying to foster good will toward immigrants and refugees .
Some intellectuals are reminding Europeans that their own ancestors once migrated en masse to the United States , Canada and elsewhere .
But they may as well be speaking Swahili .
Xenophobia is thriving across Western Europe , pumping up anti-immigrant political parties and fueling verbal and physical attacks in the streets .
From Sweden to Germany to Italy , neo- Nazi skinheads and other extremists beat and stab immigrants , sometimes even setting them afire .
Favorite targets are asylum-seekers , many of whom come to Western Europe to escape persecution .
Even many law-abiding Europeans have xenophobic fire in their bellies .
A few months ago , locals in Dover were interviewed on British television following the arrival of another boatload of Eastern Europeans .
One woman , the owner of a bed and breakfast , the kind of goodly matron who serves tea and scones to U.S. tourists with a smile , was apoplectic with rage .
`` We do n't want these filthy scum here , '' she hissed , her face flushed , a vein bulging on her right temple .
`` If they do n't go home right away , there will be blood in the streets . ''
Even Ireland , once an avid exporter of its own people , is turning hostile .
Instead of the `` hundred thousand welcomes '' promised by the Irish tourist board , asylum-seekers and other migrants are vilified for milking the country 's new prosperity .
Ireland 's first anti-immigrant group , Reclaim Dublin , was founded earlier this year .
When a pregnant woman from Angola was beaten in downtown Dublin last March , passers-by looked the other way .
Native Europeans are not just worried about their pocketbooks , though .
They are also fearful that , as dark-skinned people carve out more space here , age -old identities will be eroded .
Despite compelling evidence to the contrary , the traditional European view is that immigration is something that happens elsewhere , in countries like the United States and Australia .
Even after the influx of foreigners quickened in the 1960s and 1970s , many Europeans clung to the myth that their national cultures would somehow remain untouched , that the newcomers were only here temporarily or that they could be completely assimilated .
That has proved to be a false hope .
With millions of dark-skinned non- Christians settled in the EU , and with many more knocking on the door , native Europeans are having to rethink their national identities .
In books and in televised debates , in offices and factories , in bars and cafes , they are asking what it means to be French or English or German .
The tide of unwanted migrants has also caused political friction within the EU and may even pose a threat to the dream of European integration .
Northern countries , which tend to draw more foreigners , have accused their southern partners of not doing enough to control illegal immigration .
Under the Schengen open-border regime , Italy , with its notoriously porous coastline , is now effectively the gatekeeper for its northern neighbors -- an arrangement that unnerves Germans , Belgians and others , who wonder if a borderless Europe is such a good idea after all .
Germany , which already attracts about half of all migrants into the EU , is particularly anxious about Schengen .
`` If European integration means that an illegal immigrant can land on the coast of Italy and then come unimpeded to Berlin or Frankfurt , that makes me uncomfortable , '' says Monika Jupp , a German schoolteacher .
`` Maybe we need to take another look at how we are constructing this Europe of ours . ''
Of course , people caught up in civil wars or battered by poverty in the Third World are little concerned about the angst of well-heeled Europeans .
The only thing that matters to them is getting into the EU , whatever it takes .
Back at La Granja , in Melilla , the young men wait and wait .
As the evening draws to a close and an orange glow creeps over the horizon , another supper is served .
Fenced in by metal barriers , the men form a ragged line outside the makeshift kitchen .
The mood is sullen and a little edgy .
Another day has slipped by without reprieve , and disappointment is etched on their faces .
Tomorrow is full of grim promise .
The same wild-goose chase with documents and bureaucrats .
The same food .
The same bunk bed .
Fights sometimes break out at supper time , so a handful of Spanish police arrive to stand guard .
As he waits in line for his beans and rice , Uld - Mohamed , dressed in a clean yellow shirt and beige pants , chats with a couple of Nigerians about soccer and Spanish law , the job market in Europe and women .
After a few minutes , when the banter fizzles out , the young Mauritanian turns away to be alone .
Leaning against the metal barrier , he stares off into the distance through the wire fence that surrounds the camp , past the soccer pitch and over the water to where the southern coast of Europe lies out of sight .
`` I have made too many sacrifices , and suffered too much , to turn back now , '' he says , his young face suddenly looking old .
`` Whether they want me or not , one day I will make a home over there in Europe . ''
XXXX END OF STORY
