ATLANTA --
Coca - Cola has sent a letter about a recently filed racial discrimination lawsuit against the company to about two dozen large institutional investors .
`` As you know , the cornerstone of our share-owner affairs has been the process of enhanced dialogue and proactive communication on any issue of concern , '' wrote Thomas Paris III , manager of share-owner affairs .
`` While we believe the lawsuit is without merit , I wanted to write and assure you that our management team takes these allegations seriously .
Discrimination in any form is not tolerated . ''
The Atlanta federal court suit filed two weeks ago by four current or former African - American employees alleges that Coca - Cola systematically discriminates against blacks in pay , promotions , performance evaluations and terminations .
`` That is not true , '' Paris wrote , adding that there are `` significant errors of fact throughout the lawsuit which we will address in our response to the complaint . ''
The plaintiffs ' attorneys had no comment Thursday on Paris ' letter .
Industry analysts said the letter was not unusual given the company 's proactive nature .
`` We have regular , ongoing dialogue with institutional share owners , '' said Coca - Cola spokesman Robert Baskin .
The lawsuit has had no apparent impact on the company 's stock , which is up 4 percent over the past two weeks .
The stock closed Thursday at $ 69.12 1/2 , down $ 1.37 1/2 .
The letter to investors is similar to e-mail sent by Coca - Cola Chairman and Chief Executive M. Douglas Ivester to the company 's 10,000 U.S. employees .
That e-mail is the subject of a federal court hearing next week .
Attorneys for the plaintiffs contend that Ivester violated a local court rule when he sent the e-mail message to salaried black employees .
The attorneys said he is prevented from communicating about the lawsuit with potential members of a class-action suit without court approval .
The plaintiffs are seeking class-action status so 1,500 salaried black employees can be included in the suit .
The company has said the plaintiffs ' attempt to get a court order preventing Ivester from communicating with black employees about the suit is a typical legal maneuver that has no validity .
U.S. District Judge Richard Story is to hold a hearing on the issue Thursday .
