JERUSALEM --
As Ehud Barak steps into his new role as prime minister , he is working hard to convince the region 's players that because he is a different kind of leader with a different outlook than his predecessor , he can be trusted to take a different path to peace .
In an interview Tuesday , on the eve of a weeklong visit to Washington , Barak said he does not want to impose an Israeli blueprint for peace , because `` coming from me , that blueprint will have a virus . ''
Weary of doing battle , the former general said he wants to forge a regional peace agreement that `` works for everyone . ''
It is not a starry-eyed plan for regional brotherhood and love ; his goal is to draw a line in the sand that `` separates us from them . ''
Barak wants to break a few standing conventions at once .
He wants to negotiate on several fronts simultaneously -- with the Palestinians , the Syrians and the Lebanese .
He wants to persuade Yasser Arafat , the Palestinian leader , to abandon his demand for the full and immediate implementation of the most recent Israeli - Palestinian peace accord , the Wye River memorandum , an American -brokered land-for-security deal concluded last fall in Wye , Md.. And while Barak said he intended to embrace President Clinton as a `` major partner , '' he also wants the Americans to scale back their role in the region .
He described it as `` overly involved '' -- a result of the recent deterioration in Israel 's relationships with its neighbors .
Barak said that the Americans should be able to return to their `` special role as facilitators '' and stop acting as `` arbitrator , policeman and judge . ''
`` I do n't think the CIA should be involved in counting the number of policemen in the Gaza Strip to check up on the Palestinians , '' Barak said , referring to an American task assigned at Wye .
`` I think the American role should be more special .
This is the reason I 'm going to Washington tomorrow .
I want to share ideas and build an overall strategy . ''
In Washington , State Department officials were reluctant to comment on the specifics of Barak 's remarks .
In the interview , Barak discussed some of this thoughts on peacemaking and peacemakers .
He characterized his relationship with Arafat , for instance , who had called him a `` friend and partner '' after their first face-to-face meeting on Sunday , in guarded terms .
`` He 's a Palestinian leader , '' Barak said .
`` He 's not a Zionist or a member of B 'nai B 'rith .
We are partnerish rivals , I would say . ''
Arafat appeared physically frail in his public appearance on Sunday .
He attended the summit meeting with his personal physician .
But Barak said the Palestinian leader seemed to be in keen shape intellectually .
`` I cannot say anything about his health , '' he said .
`` But his mind is sharp , alert and clear .
He is in full control of his political arena . ''
It was evident Tuesday that Barak , who began a whirlwind diplomatic tour three days after his swearing-in last week , has barely moved into his new office .
Only portraits of Yitzhak Rabin , the assassinated prime minister and his mentor , and David Ben Gurion , Israel 's first prime minister , graced the walls .
The bookshelves were half-filled , including a full set of the Encyclopedia Judaica left behind by his predecessor , Benjamin Netanyahu .
Diplomats , generals , and politicians revolved through his office at a relentless pace .
Early Tuesday morning , the American ambassador , Edward S. Walker Jr. , left the prime minister 's heavily guarded suite as a cadre of top army officials entered , carrying enlarged maps of the Golan Heights .
By late Tuesday night , Barak was in Jordan , meeting with King Abdullah at the royal palace in Aqaba , where Barak planned to discuss his peace strategy and to enlist the king 's participation .
That Barak , a night owl , is running on very little sleep can be seen only in his tired eyes .
He has adapted very quickly to holding the reins of power , and he is in an expansive and confident mood .
He clearly finds it a relief that he is no longer in a position to merely advise , as he did with Rabin and Rabin 's successor as prime minister , Shimon Peres , but to make decisions himself .
In a public statement Tuesday , Barak said that the new momentum toward peace could provoke terrorist attacks .
He ordered Israeli security agencies to `` remain alert '' and to increase coordination with the Palestinians .
In the interview , Barak cited the risk of terrorism as one reason he is reluctant to `` proceed at full gallop '' toward carrying out the Wye agreement .
Not because he fears terrorism per se , he said , but because he believes that terrorism spoils the climate for peacemaking .
`` Terror can kill the whole process , '' he said .
In making this kind of a threat , Barak is taking a risky tack , one that some experts believe grants terrorists too much control over the peace process .
Although he did not elaborate in the interview , it is possible that Barak believes that Arafat has greater ability than ever to prevent terrorism .
Barak said he intends to abide by Wye , which Netanyahu froze last December .
In the next few weeks , he will move to carry out some aspects of the agreement , he said , but thereafter he hopes to proceed gradually -- if , and only if , Arafat concurs .
`` Clearly implementation of Wye should begin so they will see that something has changed , and that we are determined to move and not just to speak , '' Barak said .
`` But full implementation now is too risky .
It would reduce our chances of achieving a permanent peace . ''
Many Israeli and Palestinian analysts say that Arafat never expected Netanyahu to proceed with honest intentions into the final status negotiations .
Those are the talks to make a permanent peace , which involve the thorniest issues , including the status of Jerusalem , the return of Palestinian refugees , and the final borders of the Palestinian entity .
Arafat , analysts say , approached the Wye negotiations as if they were the last chance to obtain a transfer of land from Israeli to Palestinian control in the West Bank .
If he were convinced that Barak was serious about making a final deal , Arafat might be willing to start the final status talks before the third phase of Wye was carried out , Palestinian officials said .
That phase calls for the return of 13 percent of the West Bank , reportedly in the Hebron area .
It would leave 15 Jewish settlements surrounded by areas under Palestinian control .
Some Israeli analysts believe that this final phase could be both unpopular and dangerous , creating political instability in Israel and increasing the risk of terrorist attacks on the newly isolated settlers .
`` It 's a crisis awaiting us at the end of the street , '' Barak said .
`` It does n't need a genius to identify that we 're entering a gantlet with a lot of dangers . ''
That is reportedly why Barak thinks that carrying out all the provisions of Wye right away would reduce the chances of reaching a final agreement .
He may also want to hold on to the land as a bargaining chip in negotiating other issues .
Barak said that he would give Arafat a deadline ; he would promise to return the land by a given date no matter where the final status talks stood at that point .
`` I told Arafat we are going to follow the kind of relationship you had with Rabin , '' Barak said .
`` Namely , we 'll have crises .
It wo n't be easy .
We 'll have ups and downs and setbacks and moments when only a direct contact between us can avoid collapse .
`` But we will do it in a direct , frank way , '' he continued , as if talking to Arafat .
`` It 's clear that we have different interests .
But if we carry on with determination to put an end to the conflict , there 's a good chance we will be able to do it . ''
All the leaders in the Mideast find themselves in a crucial moment , Barak said , with the possibility of working together or seeing the region disintegrate or explode .
`` We have to climb together like a team of cliff climbers , to go to the summit together , '' he said .
`` Otherwise , the alternative is that we may all fall into the abyss below .
`` That is what I told Arafat , I told Mubarak , I will tell King Abdullah tonight , and I will tell Assad when we meet in the future , '' he said , referring to President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt , the king of Jordan , and President Hafez al- Assad of Syria .
`` I was not afraid to fight the Arabs , '' Barak said .
`` And I 'm not afraid to make peace with them . ''
