MOSCOW --
On its face , it is no great shakes that Russia 's sixth-biggest oil company , Sibneft , unveiled a spiffy new green-and-blue logo in April .
What makes it a symbolic symbol indeed is the logo 's two flavors : traditional Cyrillic , for Russians -- and English , for most everyone else .
For an industry that has exemplified this nation 's hand-on-the-throat style of business , there may be no better metaphor .
Russia 's oil tycoons largely founded their empires through dark-of-night political deals and squeezing out competitors , and until lately they have run their companies pretty much the same way .
But now , if the barons themselves are to be believed , the era of wildcatter capitalism is over .
The new mantra of Russian oil companies is the same one invoked in the worsted-wool realm of Western business : corporate strategies , transparent finances , independent directors , professional managers .
`` Russia is following the world trend , '' Sibneft 's Fordham -educated president , Yevgeny Schvidler , said in a recent interview .
`` Sometimes , it is in front of the trend . ''
There remains but one hitch : Just as with spiffy new logos , not everyone is ready to believe that the transformations are much more than symbolic .
Sibneft is in some ways a test case of whether the industry can reinvent itself -- or whether it really wants to .
From their European -style headquarters on the very toniest stretch of downtown 's Moscow River bank , executives say they are remaking the company in the image of global business -- and , to an extent , experts agree .
In recent months , the company has issued Russia 's first corporate governance charter , a document that sets out rules for treating all shareholders fairly , and agreed to give outsiders two seats on its board .
And in the spring it began selling its shares on secondary international markets in the form of American drawing rights .
The company is gunning for full listing on foreign exchanges in the years ahead .
Sibneft is one of a handful of Russian companies whose books are audited according to `` generally accepted accounting practices , '' meaning that results are reported using the same rules that apply to foreign companies .
And unlike other big Russian petroleum companies , it pledges to make public the identities of its major shareholders , probably next year .
`` Russia 's most progressive oil company , '' Sibneft boasts in an advertisement that ran recently in one local newspaper .
And analysts say that could be true .
The problem , they caution , is that the competition is not especially stiff .
Russian oil companies , Sibneft included , are saddled with such murky and occasionally devious pasts that international business rules are still a novelty for many .
And even well-run companies are enmeshed in Russia 's treacherous politics , where a single misstep can have serious consequences .
Russia has its share of well-run companies : Lukoil , the biggest , is also making strides toward more open operations , and Surgutneftegaz , No. 3 , is seen as downright conservative .
But Western investors know from bitter experience not to take them at face value .
The country 's second-biggest oil company , Yukos , used stock issues to move much of itself offshore earlier this year in an attempt to skirt creditors and minority shareholders , including the American financier Kenneth Dart .
BP - Amoco sank $ 571 million into Russia 's No. 5 oil company , Sidanko , in 1997 , only to discover that its books concealed massive debts .
The company went bankrupt , and a politically attuned Russian oil company , Tyumen , has since picked off some of Sidanko 's most valuable assets in what skeptics charge is a rigged bankruptcy court .
Last week , though , it agreed to return a prized Siberian oil field to BP - Amoco 's control .
The industry is legendary for its schemes to launder oil money , mislabeling products and manipulating sales prices to move profits into offshore banks and away from shareholders and government authorities .
Such behavior may not be excusable , analysts say , but it is explained easily enough .
`` You have to remember that this is an industry where the primary interest , at least until a couple of years ago , was to get the cash and run , '' Vittorio Juncker , a petroleum analyst for the World Bank in London , said in a recent interview .
`` Oil was one of the best ways in which you could accumulate financial reserves outside Russia .
A lot of private fortunes have been built on that . ''
It is precisely that sort of reputation that Sibneft officials say they are leaving behind .
And for good reason : Increasingly , being a traditional Russian oil company can be dangerous to one 's corporate health .
Sibneft is only about four years old , but already its past is not pretty .
Like a number of leading oil companies , Sibneft sprang from a now-notorious program called `` loans for shares , '' in which the Kremlin handed out stakes in major industries -- almost always to insider friends -- as collateral for loans it never repaid .
In Sibneft 's case , a company tied to Boris Berezovsky , the tycoon and political lightning rod who was Boris Yeltsin 's re-election campaign financier , won the rights to 51 percent of the stock in 1995 .
In return for a $ 100 million loan , he got control of a company then valued at roughly $ 600 million , including Russia 's best oil refinery and proven petroleum reserves larger than those of Texaco .
Several insider deals , a lawsuit and a hotly disputed auction later , a single group -- unidentified , so far -- controls some 90 percent of the company .
Both Sibneft and Berezovsky now insist that he has no financial interest in the company , which seems to be dominated by an equally wealthy Berezovsky associate and friend of Yeltsin , Roman Abramovich .
Shareholder or not , Berezovsky seems lashed to the company in the eyes of his enemies .
As prime minister last February , the most prominent of those enemies , Yevgeny Primakov , engineered a nine-hour police raid on Sibneft 's headquarters , seizing surveillance equipment to bolster charges that Berezovsky spied on political figures .
Berezovsky denies the allegations .
Yeltsin fired Primakov last summer , and he is now seen as a major contender in next June 's presidential elections .
That could bode ill : Primakov 's allies in the Otechestvo party have talked of revoking the supposedly rigged loans-for-shares deals , with Sibneft dead in their sights .
`` The basic problem of the controlling shareholders is that they 're very sensitive to the political environment , '' said Ivan Mazalov , an oil-industry analyst at Troika Dialog , a Moscow brokerage firm .
`` They have lots of powerful friends .
And they have quite a few enemies who , should they come to power , would certainly make efforts to settle scores . ''
Sibneft 's president , Schvindler , says he is well aware of the hazards of hitching a company 's fortunes to politicians , and has erected a corporate barrier between politics and business that is `` higher than a Chinese wall . ''
Sibneft nevertheless continues to benefit from government favors like its inclusion in a food-for-oil exchange with Iraq .
News reports suggest that it could receive more favored treatment in a looming selloff of government oil assets , an apparent pre-election move by the Kremlin to shore up corporate political backing .
Sibneft also supplies petroleum from its Omsk refinery to an oil-trading company run in part by Yeltsin 's son-in-law , Leonid Dyachenko .
Schvindler says the relationship began well before Sibneft took over the Omsk refinery and , in any case , that the dealings are at arm 's length .
Still , Sibneft has moved with growing speed to convince foreigners of its legitimacy since Schvindler took over the top job in 1998 .
And `` at some point you have to allow a company a chance to become a good corporate citizen , '' said Eric Wigertz , an analyst in the Moscow office of Brunswick Warburg .
`` Sibneft is taking some good steps , at least on paper . ''
Significantly , the company settled a venomous dispute this spring with Dart , perhaps the industry 's most vociferous critic , by giving him representation on Sibneft 's board in exchange for agreement to roll an oil-extraction subsidiary -- and Dart 's shares in it -- into the larger company .
Schvindler also has plans to halt a financial slide that some credit to a lack of oil-savvy management during the early and ' 90s .
Oil production in Sibneft 's fields has fallen almost every year this decade , and will remain low in 1999 .
Investment has sunk to half its 1996 level in the wake of last year 's economic crash .
But the company will also pay down nearly three-fourths of its debt by the end of this year , analysts say , and it has teamed up with the international oil-services company Schlumberger to tease more oil from aging wells .
Sibneft has also announced plans for a network of more than 1,000 retail gas stations -- still a novelty in Russia , where most stations are literally mom-and-pop operations .
Most will be in Siberia , where the company has a natural monopoly .
Experts say that owning the stations will allow Sibneft to maintain cash flow and profits even when oil prices fall .
But Sibneft , they add , still has to settle two important matters .
One is that its major partner in petroleum exports is a Gibraltar company , Runicom , which is not only owned by Sibneft management , but which itself owns 10 percent of Sibneft .
That leaves Sibneft open to the charge that it has funneled profits to managers by selling its oil to Runicom at a discount ; such internal transactions are not public .
Schvindler says the company does not manipulate oil prices now , if it ever did , and adds that the general figures in its latest audit back up that claim .
The second is Sibneft 's still-secret ownership , which some critics say could be disclosed in short order if the company were genuinely committed to openness .
Schvindler says it is not that easy .
In Russia , the wealthy are marked people , by criminals and government alike , and pulling back the veil on ownership is a long and complex process .
Some suspect that process began early this month , when more than 40 percent of Sibneft shares were shifted from a company believed to be controlled by Berezovsky to a Russian bank .
Others say the shift was a defensive move to prevent Primakov from linking Berezovsky to Sibneft in the presidential campaign .
This is how business is conducted in Russia , at least for the moment .
`` They 're moving in the right direction , '' James Henderson , director of research at Renaissance Capital , a Moscow investment bank , said of Sibneft 's managers .
`` But an investment community which has become very , very cynical about Russia -- and with good reason -- will be very skeptical about whether they 're really playing by the rules or just putting up a facade . ''
