JERUSALEM --
Renewing a battle for control of this city that is as ancient as the city itself , Israeli Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon Tuesday declared Jerusalem `` forever the capital of the Jewish people and the state of Israel . ''
With his words , the hawkish former general moved a thorny issue into the forefront of the faltering Israeli - Palestinian peace process and Israel 's upcoming elections .
`` Israel will never make any concessions on Jerusalem -- never , '' thundered Sharon at the King David Hotel after meeting with a group of foreign ambassadors .
He was responding to what the Israeli government took as a diplomatic slap in the face by the European Union , against the backdrop of an ongoing debate over the position of the United States , which officially does not recognize Israel 's sovereignty over the city .
Last week , the European Union , insisting that Jerusalem is officially separate from Israel , rejected a request to halt meetings with Palestinians in historically Arab East Jerusalem .
In 1947 United Nations Resolution 181 called for international control of Jerusalem , which is holy to Judaism , Islam , and Christianity .
But Sharon Tuesday pronounced the resolution `` null and void , '' noting that Arab states rejected that resolution more than 50 years ago .
Still , most of the world 's nations do not recognize Israeli sovereignty over Jerusalem , saying the city 's status is unresolved .
Technically , this includes the United States , said US Embassy spokesmen Larry Schwartz .
That is why the US Embassy to this day is in Tel Aviv , not Jerusalem .
`` The US believes the ultimate status of Jerusalem will be resolved in permanent status negotiations .
It was the Israelis and Palestinians who agreed to this , and we have to respect that , '' Schwartz said .
But Schwartz added that the official US policy is in flux .
In 1995 , both chambers of Congress overwhelmingly passed the `` Jerusalem Embassy Act , '' which mandates construction of a new embassy in Jerusalem -- with a deadline of mid- May .
With that deadline looming and no plans in sight for a ground-breaking , Schwartz said President Clinton is expected to request a waiver , on the grounds that that the United States should do nothing that could undermine the peace process .
Under the historic 1993 Camp David peace accord , the Israelis and Palestinians agreed that the future of Jerusalem would be decided in `` final status '' talks , which have yet to take place .
Israel sees Jerusalem as its eternal and indivisible capital .
The Israelis captured the West Bank and East Jerusalem , including the Old City , from Jordan during the 1967 Six Day War .
Israel annexed Jerusalem shortly afterward , and the image of Jewish paratroopers at the Western Wall is seen by many Jews as a miracle that returned the Old City to Jewish rule after a 2,000-year diaspora .
The Palestinians , however , see East Jerusalem as illegally occupied territory and the capital of their own future state .
Palestinian legislator Hanan Ashrawi said Sharon 's comments make it clear the Israelis have no intention of negotiating the future of Jerusalem as they agreed to in the peace plan .
She called Sharon 's rejection of UN Resolution 181 `` outrageous and illegal . ''
German ambassador Theodor Wallau , whose country holds the rotating presidency of the European Union , said after meeting with Sharon that the status of Jerusalem `` is obviously a very sensitive issue ... . The EU has no interest to preempt the outcome of these negotiations . ''
Sharon , who fought for control of Jerusalem in the Israeli - Arab wars of 1948 and 1967 , said , `` It 's very hard to imagine that after all those years we again have to struggle for Jerusalem . ''
In what some analysts said was an indication that Sharon 's statements were geared toward Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 's reelection campaign , Sharon added that , `` If it is our government , led by Mr. Netanyahu , the negotiations over Jerusalem will be very short .
There will never be any negotiation on Jerusalem . ''
The other candidates in the race , especially the more liberal Labor Party leader Ehud Barak , have taken similarly hard lines .
A joint Israeli - Palestinian public opinon poll published Tuesday found 91 percent of Palestinians would reject any final agreement in which Jerusalem becomes the undivided capital of Israel , while 70 percent of Israelis said they would oppose any accord declaring East Jerusalem capital of a future Palestinian state .
