James R. Tobin , who resigned Wednesday as Biogen Inc. 's chief executive officer , said Thursday he chuckled at Wall Street speculation that he may be a candidate for chief operating officer at Boston Scientific Corp. , the Natick , Mass .
medical device maker .
`` I 've never met anyone there and Peter Nicolas -LRB- Boston Scientific 's chairman -RRB- and I have been trying for months to have breakfast , which is now scheduled in February , '' said Tobin in a telephone interview from Colorado , where he is on a ski vacation with his family .
Several Wall Street analysts said Tobin would make a strong chief operating officer at Boston Scientific , which is currently facing a federal probe stemming form the recall of one of its products .
`` Having Tobin at Boston Scientific would make a lot of sense , because they get a seasoned manager , '' said Kenneth S. Abramowitz , a medical products analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein Co .
Tobin said he did not know much about the Boston Scientific job , adding that he has made no immediate plans since informing Biogen 's board late Tuesday that he was leaving .
`` I do know that I will never go into a company as a Number 2 , having done that twice , and I am not going to do that again , '' he added .
Tobin spent 21 years at Baxter International , rising to the Number 2 spot as president , before joining Biogen in February 1994 as president and chief operating officer .
He became chief executive officer in 1997 , when chairman James Vincent turned over day-to-day control of the company .
Asked about his decision to leave , Tobin stressed that there were no differences with Vincent in their strategy for running Biogen .
But there were differences in styles , along with some disagreements .
Vincent ran Biogen from 1985 to 1997 and is credited with turning the nearly bankrupt company around .
Vincent 's familiarity with all levels of Biogen reportedly led to his involvement in certain details for which Tobin was responsible , leading to a showdown with the board of directors .
On Tuesday , the board sided with Vincent , prompting Tobin to resign .
`` It is not a criticism , but if I were in his shoes and had been there a long time , I might have done the same thing , '' said Tobin , adding that he had a lot more fun running Biogen compared to his last few years at Baxter Inernational .
Looking ahead , Tobin said he wants to stay in the health-care field , preferably at a smaller company than a larger one .
He said he received several calls after a Wall Street analyst during Bigen 's conference call Wednesday questioned whether his departure was a result of personal problems .
`` My only weakness is chocolate , '' he said .
