JAKARTA , Indonesia --
Indonesia is holding its breath .
Ready or not , it is about to leap into the second phase of its transition from 32 years of dictatorship with an election -- just six weeks away -- that will shape the post- Suharto era .
Though the election has been planned for months , it is fraught with uncertainties , from unresolved technical questions to the possibility of violent rivalries and attempts to derail the ballot .
The election , scheduled for June 7 , will be the first step in a complex process of selecting a 700-member body that is to choose a president in November .
None of the parties is expected to win a majority ; the leading parties will be happy to win 30 percent of the vote .
Intense coalition-building is expected after the election .
It will be the first democratic vote in this nation of 200 million people since the 1950s , and the capstone to the uprising that forced former President Suharto from power last May .
But with competing interests -- political and religious rivalries , major economic feifs , an unsettled military and a plethora of armed groups -- and with election preparations far behind schedule , many analysts are bracing for confusion , electoral disputes and violence .
`` We do n't want to see more dead victims in the process of democratization , '' President B.J. Habibie said recently .
`` We all want to see a smooth , peaceful election .
Otherwise disaster is waiting for us . ''
Since Suharto took power in 1965 , no one has ever lost a presidential election in Indonesia : He was always the only candidate .
A do-or-die contest with 48 parties will be a new experience with unpredictable results .
`` We are probably heading for a very chaotic election , '' said David Timberman , an American election analyst .
`` There is far too much that needs to be done with far too little time and far too few resources .
`` Even the best-case scenario will probably be characterized by a great deal of ad-hoc-ism and improvisation , which in turn will lead to confusion , inconsistencies and , as a result of that , a great number of disputes and controversies .
There is nobody who knows how this is going to turn out . ''
One Western diplomat said : `` The diplomatic community expects serious violence in May and June , but it has very , very little idea who may be behind it or why or what the consequences might be for the election .
`` I am relatively optimistic that the election will take place and that the votes will be distributed relatively fairly .
I expect we 'll see a lot of violence and in the end see some kind of coalition emerge . ''
Hari Tchan , a political analyst with the Center for Strategic and International Studies , said the greatest threat of instability would come from a possible victory by Golkar , the political party that was formed to protect the interests of Suharto and that still dominates the government .
It is the party of Habibie , who is resented by many in the political elite because of his ties to the past as Suharto 's vice president .
This taint , along with sharp internal rivalries , make it unclear whether Habibie will be the party 's presidential nominee .
`` If the forces considered to be pro status quo win , people will just not accept that , '' Tchan said .
`` There will be prolonged disturbances , prolonged tension . ''
Though the country 's many competing groups have for the most part swapped street demonstrations for electoral politics , the momentum still appears to be with the forces of change .
An outcome that does not bring a clear-cut end to the Suharto era will not be widely accepted , Tchan said .
But Habibie has overturned much of the legacy of his mentor and introduced a vividly open new style of leadership .
For the moment the capital is strikingly calm .
The disruptive student demonstrations and violence of four months ago have disappeared from the streets .
The collapse of the economy has become a way of life , with people hunkering down in more frugal and limited lives .
An outbreak of communal violence that has taken hundreds of lives this year in several remote areas has not , so far , spread to the capital or had a significant political impact here .
But the potential for widespread violence remains , particularly as Indonesia 's economy continues to founder .
The local eruptions have mostly involved long-suppressed ethnic , religious and separatist conflicts , issues that are reflected across Indonesia and could flare spontaneously , or be provoked for political reasons , at any time .
