MOSCOW --
President Vladimir V. Putin Friday sharply criticized Russia 's military brass , whose top generals are locked in a public feud over whether to cut the country 's nuclear arsenal to beef up its deteriorating conventional forces .
In comments at the beginning of a Kremlin meeting with security advisers , called to discuss warnings that Moscow 's once-formidable military machine is rusting away , Putin avoided taking sides in the disagreement over nuclear and conventional forces .
But he said bluntly that the military was not working efficiently , and was badly in need of reform .
`` Are our armed forces , our whole military component , effective ?
Unfortunately , they are not , '' he said .
`` The well-being of our citizens as well as the state 's security depends on the right solution .
`` The current structure of the armed forces is hardly optimal .
How can it be considered optimal if training is not conducted in many units , pilots rarely fly and sailors rarely go to sea ? '' he said .
Sergei Ivanov , secretary of Putin 's advisory Security Council , said decisions were made during the meeting to increase military spending and improve combat readiness .
He did n't elaborate .
But analysts said the conferees glossed over a much deeper problem for Russia 's armed forces : Moscow is trying to maintain a military that it simply ca n't afford .
`` For the last decade the Russian military has been trying to keep parity with the United States .
This is mission impossible , '' said Pavel Felgenhauer , a Moscow -based defense analyst .
A look at the numbers explains why .
The Russian defense budget for this year is $ 4.5 billion .
By way of comparison , President Clinton on Wednesday signed a $ 287.5 billion defense spending bill for the fiscal year starting Oct. 1 , some $ 30 billion bigger than Russia 's entire gross domestic product .
Russia 's 1.2 million-member armed forces are broke and low on modern equipment and morale .
For the past month Russia 's top two defense officials , Defense Minister Igor Sergeyev and Armed Forces Chief of Staff Anatoly Kvashnin , have been feuding over whether the country 's scarce funds should be spent on nuclear weapons or conventional arms .
Kvashnin wants to cut nuclear weapons and develop conventional arms .
According to defense experts , about 70 percent of Russia 's weapons procurement funds go to its nuclear arsenal .
He also seeks to downgrade Russia 's Strategic Rocket Forces -- a separate branch of the military that controls the country 's land -based nuclear weapons -- and place it under the control of the air force .
Sergeyev , a veteran of the Strategic Rocket Forces , said such a move would constitute `` a crime against Russia and simple madness . ''
The structure of the armed forces appeared to remain intact after the four-hour meeting , despite speculation that the session might result in major reorganization .
Alexander Pikayev , a military analyst at the Carnegie Center for International Peace in Moscow said Friday 's meeting was the start of a `` long , controversial process '' in which Putin will need to decide whether Russia will remain a major nuclear power . ''
