LOUISVILLE , Ky. --
The presidential campaign erupted into fireworks Thursday , even before its traditional Labor Day kick-off , after the Republicans distributed a TV ad questioning Al Gore 's credibility by showing him at a Buddhist temple and suggesting he invented the Internet .
`` There 's Al Gore reinventing himself , '' a woman says in the Republican National Committee ad that was sent to television stations Thursday and will air as early as Friday night in 17 states .
The Bush campaign cast the piece as `` tongue-in-cheek , '' yet it dovetailed with the Texas governor 's recent focus on Gore 's credibility .
Bush has claimed that Gore 's pledges to provide prescription drugs and middle-class tax cuts echo promises he and President Clinton made in the 1992 campaign .
`` You know why he has to say it eight years later ? ''
Bush asked a crowd at the Butler Traditional High School here during a speech that mainly focused on his education agenda .
`` Because they could n't deliver on the promise eight years ago . ''
The current Democratic ticket said the TV commercial showed Bush had decided to break his vow against negative campaigning to stop his recent slip in the polls .
With Gore standing silently in the background , his running mate , Connecticut Senator Joseph I. Lieberman , told a crowd of 2,500 in Seattle about the Republican ad , eliciting a loud `` boo . ''
`` Today , I 'm sorry to say that Governor Bush 's promise to change the tone of American politics has run into the reality of a troubled Bush - Cheney campaign , '' Lieberman said .
`` These new attack ads break his promise not to launch personal attacks in this campaign and they drag us back to the worst politics of the past . ''
Lieberman continued : `` It seems to me today that Governor Bush has sadly changed his tune about changing the tone . ''
Two political analysts questioned the timing of the ad , but said it was within the bounds of fairness .
`` The argument for Bush is still significantly an argument for change and an argument for character and an argument for trust , '' said Washington political analyst Stuart Rothenberg .
`` My own view , for what it 's worth , is if you ca n't talk about an opponent 's character , you 're carving out an awfully large area of what you 're electing .
Presumably , the person you vote to such a high office has the character you want . ''
Larry Sabato , a political science professor at the University of Virginia , agreed , saying : `` Bush 's argument is that Gore is a hypocrite , you ca n't believe what he says because what he does is different , and it 's time for a change .
If Americans do n't accept that , he 's going to lose . ''
Both Sabato and Rothenberg said the ad 's timing may be telling .
`` I guess I 'm surprised they do n't wait to see what happens with the -LRB- poll -RRB- numbers , unless they feel like the race is slipping away or that the coverage is going so against them , '' Rothenberg said .
Sabato thought that was exactly what was happening .
`` Since the Democratic convention , the Bush campaign has been in a trough that has n't fully showed up in the polls .
They desperately need to get off the defensive and on to the offensive , and everybody would agree this is on the offensive , '' the professor said .
The new ad is being sponsored by Victory 2000 , a wing of the RNC that , like the committee itself , is now under the control of the Bush campaign .
The spot is titled `` Really '' and focuses on what Republicans view as Gore 's chief weakness : his credibility , especially in the aftermath of President Clinton 's lies about his affair with Monica S. Lewinsky .
The commercial begins by showing a TV set in a kitchen as it plays a tape of Gore at the 1996 Buddhist temple fund-raiser while the vice president pledges to make campaign finance reform his No. 1 political priority .
A woman 's voice says : `` There 's Al Gore reinventing himself on television again .
Like I 'm not going to notice .
Who 's he going to be today ?
The Al Gore who raises campaign money at a Buddhist temple or the one who now promises campaign finance reform ?
Really . ''
The commercial then shows a clip of Gore on CNN in 1999 saying , `` I took the initiative in creating the Internet . ''
The woman responds : `` Al Gore claiming credit for things he did n't even do . ''
When the clip ends , the woman says , `` Yeah , and I invented the remote control .
Another round of this and I 'll sell my TV . ''
Bush personally reviewed and approved the ad .
His spokeswoman , Karen Hughes , denied it was an attack ad , saying both she and her 13-year -old son laughed when they first saw the spot Tuesday .
`` It 's a tongue-in-cheek , good-natured way of making a very important point : There is a gaping credibility gap between what Vice President Gore does and what Vice President Gore says , '' Hughes said .
She said the ad was justified given a $ 30-million ad blitz by the Democratic National Party during the GOP convention .
`` We have held our fire , but the RNC now feels it 's time to tell America to consider the source , '' she said .
The Republican ad appeared to reflect a new sense of urgency within the Bush campaign .
The Buddhist temple and Internet footage are considered some of the most potent in the GOP arsenal , and Bush 's campaign has had them stockpiled for over a year .
The April 29 , 1996 , fund-raiser at the Hsi Lai Buddhist Temple near Los Angeles has been one of Gore 's biggest embarrassments .
The event was controversial because it may have violated the temple 's tax-exempt status , and because members of the temple were illegally reimbursed for contributions to the Democratic Party .
This month , Attorney General Janet Reno decided not to seek an independent counsel related to Gore 's fund-raising .
Gore himself has often joked that his biggest mistake in this campaign was his March 1999 comment on CNN : `` During my service in the United States Congress , I took the initiative in creating the Internet . ''
Gore has since said he meant only that he took the lead in laying down the policy that helped develop the Internet .
The RNC 's decision to air the Gore ad prompted the Democrats to change their advertising strategy .
The Democratic National Committee had plans to unveil an ad or ads attacking Bush 's record in Texas , specifically his record on health care , but the committee decided to hold them .
The Gore campaign received fodder this week with the news that a federal judge had ordered Texas to fix problems in providing Medicaid services to some 1.5 million children .
A senior Democratic official said of the RNC commercial : `` We think this will backfire . ''
Instead , the Gore campaign decided to focus on claiming that Bush had broken his pledge to shun negative campaigning .
Anne E. Kornblut of the Globe staff , traveling with Gore in Seattle , contributed to this report .
Wire service material was used in its preparation .
