WASHINGTON --
Following are excerpts from an interview President Clinton gave to Justice Department investigators in a campaign finance inquiry in April .
The president was asked about conversations with an Indonesian businessman and campaign contributor , James T. Riady , who gave $ 100,000 to a close friend of Clinton , Webster L. Hubbell .
Q. Do you recall the car ride that you had with Mr. Riady on Aug. 14 of 1992 ?
A. Not specifically .
I do remember though that I saw him sometime in 1992 and that he wanted to help .
But I do n't remember anything about the car ride ... . Q. Whether it 's in the car ride or sometime else in ` 92 , do you have a specific recollection about James Riady pledging $ 1 million to your campaign ?
A. I do n't .
I do n't .
And I do n't know whether he ever gave that much money .
My recollection is I had n't seen him in a while .
We had a nice little reunion , and he said he was going to help us .
I do n't remember what the specific dollar was .
Q. As candidate Clinton in August of 1992 , an offer of $ 1 million would have been something that was of some interest to you -- A. Yeah , if he said that , I 'm surprised I do n't remember it .
I mean , but I , I -- you asked me what I remember .
I ca n't remember any specific thing .
I know that I saw him sometime in ` 92 after I became the nominee and I know he said he was going to help us .
If he said he was going to give us $ 1 million , which he might have done , I just do n't remember it .
Sometimes people give that much money .
I know in an election or two ago that one of the Republicans got that much money from one source .
So , it happens from time to time and it 's not unlawful .
But I , I just do n't remember .
Q. Mr. James Riady is someone whom you have described up until this point as being not necessarily significant in any of your prior campaigns .
So , that same person offering you , pledging to you to raise $ 1 million might have been startling to you in August of 1992 .
A. Well , I -- yeah , it would .
That 's why I 'm surprised , if he said a million , I 'm surprised I do n't remember it .
But all I can tell you is what I remember .
But it would n't have surprised me that they could have given that much money .
I knew they had that kind of , that , you know , they were wealthy .
I knew they had big business interests in America and , of course , you know under the Campaign Finance Law an American subsidiary , people associated with that foreign operation , or a citizen of another country that has legal immigrant status here can contribute .
So , he would certainly have the capacity to do it .
That would n't surprise me .
But I -- if he did say it , it surprises me that I do n't remember because it 's the sort of thing you 'd remember .
Q. Mr. Riady has described that limousine ride to another person and narrates that , in fact , he made that pledge to you and that you were taken aback .
A. I certainly would n't dispute his memory of it .
All I can tell you is that I don ' t remember it .
But I know that he wanted to help the campaign and that he wanted to be generous and he -- and like I said , any amount of money he wanted to give , I would n't -- his capacity to give it would n't surprise me .
And I know he did give us quite a bit of money ... . Q. On June 27 , a Riady -controlled entity paid Webster Hubbell $ 100,000 .
The previous weekend , June 23 , WAVE records reflect that Mr. Riady met with you in the White House .
Do you have any recollection of a conversation with Mr. Riady concerning Webster Hubbell in the days before a Riady -controlled entity paid him $ 100,000 ?
A. No , sir , I do n't .
You know , let me just say this .
It 's possible that he could have said to me , `` I 'm going to help Webb Hubbell , you know , I know Webb Hubbell and I want to try to help him , because everybody knew that I knew him well , that he had been here working . ''
And so if , in fact , I did meet with him then , if that , in fact , did happen , and if -- but I do n't remember it , but might have met with him .
If , in fact , I met with him it would n't surprise me if he 'd said that , something like that in passing .
But I do not remember him doing that .
