TEL AVIV --
Israelis and Palestinians on Sunday begin their final push to agree on an outline for a final peace pact by a May 13 deadline .
But the two sides appear far apart on every issue , ranging from the status of Jerusalem to whose turn it is to show flexibility .
Israeli officials said they were ready to make the necessary compromises to get an agreement with the Palestinians on the contours of a final treaty , but they warned that this would require movement from the Palestinians as well .
`` We 're coming to the negotiations with the view that these are very important talks , with a historical burden after 100 years of conflict , and we think that now is the time to reach a comprehensive agreement , '' said Gadi Baltiansky , spokesman for Prime Minister Ehud Barak .
`` We are going to show flexibility and willingness , but without them showing flexibility it will be impossible to reach an agreement , '' he said .
Some members of Barak 's cabinet have recently suggested giving the Palestinians 70 to 80 percent of the West Bank , a sharp increase from previous proposals but still short of Palestinian demands for return of all the lands Israel occupied in the 1967 Middle East War .
Senior Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erakat , who will meet Sunday with his Israeli counterpart , Oded Eran , in the Israeli resort town of Eilat on the Red Sea , said the Palestinians had already compromised enough .
He said the Palestinians have shown both flexibility and a commitment to peace by proposing to establish their independent state in the West Bank and Gaza -- rather than demanding the return of historic Palestine -- and now it is Israel 's turn to prove its sincerity by showing flexibility .
`` This gives us just 22 percent of what was Palestine .
It 's a sign that we have accepted living in peace with Israel , '' he said .
`` I hope that Israel will look at the bigger picture of a historic conciliation , at the chance for a comprehensive peace , rather than trying to snatch pieces here and there , '' Erakat said .
This round of talks , which is expected to continue for about 10 days , is the culmination of months of inconclusive talks both here and in Washington , including two separate meetings President Bill Clinton held this month with Barak and later with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat .
US Middle East envoy Dennis Ross will also attend the talks in Eilat beginning Tuesday or Wednesday , after meeting with Barak and Arafat , although he was not expected to be arriving with any specific proposal to push talks forward .
`` The sides right now have to seriously engage with each other to find a way to succeed , '' said a US official .
The framework agreement , which is supposed to lay out general , joint proposals on the details of a final peace treaty in time to meet the new Sept. 13 deadline for a treaty , is itself already months behind after talks stalled earlier this year over a scheduled transfer of West Bank land to the Palestinian Authority .
But there is a new sense of urgency , partly because of US presidential elections .
Both sides believe that the best way to ensure US support for a peace deal -- economic and political -- is to conclude it while Bill Clinton is still president .
There is also a sense that negotiating time is running under the 1993 Oslo peace accords , according to which the Palestinians received limited self-rule in parts of the West Bank and Gaza .
The final peace deal was supposed to be concluded last year .
It is unclear how long the two sides can keep extending the Oslo accords without running into domestic difficulties from hard-liners on both sides .
The delay in negotiating a comprehensive peace treaty is due to disagreement on those issues that are not just the most controversial , but also the most basic .
These include the borders of a Palestinian state , the future of Palestinian refugees , the fate of Jewish settlements on the occupied West Bank and Gaza land and the status of Jerusalem .
For example , Arafat has demanded that the refugees , numbering some 3 million if their descendants are included , be offered the right of return to what is now Israel , something Israel dismisses , except for perhaps token family reunification .
Arafat also wants his capital in east Jerusalem , which Israel occupied in the 1967 Middle East war and says it will never relinquish .
Jewish settlements are another problem , with Israel saying it wants to keep the majority in `` settlement blocs '' despite Palestinian insistence that they get back all the land Israel occupied in 1967 .
One more sticking point is that both Arafat and Barak must be sensitive to the demands of their constituents , which means they both may have even less room to maneuver than they may want .
Barak 's broad but shaky coalition includes the National Religious Party , whose support base comes from the some 160,000 Jewish settlers who live in the West Bank and Gaza .
Most of the settlers oppose giving up any more land to Palestinian rule .
Arafat has to deal not just with the Palestinians , but with the whole Arab world , which also does not recognize Israeli rule over east Jerusalem and its Islamic holy sites .
Arafat also must tread carefully when it comes to the refugee issue or risk their opposition , a political analyst said .
`` I do n't think the Palestinian side can give up on the refugee issue , or settlements or Jerusalem , so I think it 's going to be difficult to reach a real agreement , '' said Palestinian political analyst Ghassan Khatib .
But over this weekend Israeli officials insisted that the two sides could manage a deal , although nobody wanted to give specifics on how this could be done .
`` All the gaps are bridgeable and I believe that both the Israelis and the Palestinians are now aware of the fact that you ca n't fulfill 100 percent of your dreams , but there is one dream you can reach and that is the dream of peace , '' said Deputy Defense Minister Ephraim Sneh .
