SAN FRANCISCO --
In June , when Mrs. O'G learned that her cancer had returned and metastasized , she figured she might not have a whole lot of time to get her affairs in order .
One big item of business : A 30-year -old safe deposit box that rested in a Bank of America branch a few blocks from Mrs. O'G 's home .
`` I gave the girl the keys and she went to check the signature card .
Then she came back and said , ` Well , your safety deposit box is n't here .
It 's been drilled , '' said Mrs. O'G , who is 78 , widowed and prefers not to have her full name used .
`` I did n't know what ` drilled ' meant .
I just thought the box was someplace else . ''
What Mrs. O'G found out , after weeks of phone calls and digging by her daughters , Mary and Peggy , was that drilled meant disaster .
Everything of personal value that Mrs. O'G stored in the box had been destroyed when the bank sent the contents to the state Controller 's Office as `` unclaimed property '' in 1997 .
As Mary and Peggy discovered just last week , only one document was spared : an easily reproducible certificate for some Pacific Gas & Electric stock .
Gone forever was the deed to Mrs. O'G 's Holy cemetery plot and the naturalization papers she and her husband received when they arrived in the United States from Ireland in the late 1940s .
Those she 'd planned to give to her grandchildren .
`` Here she 's had so much taken away by the cancer , and somebody took her history away , '' Mary said .
`` This is just shocking to me .
I did n't believe something like this could happen . ''
If Mrs. O'G 's story is any indication , something like this may be happening to many people .
After all , the state controller 's office now houses more than $ 2.6 billion in unclaimed property belonging to some 5.2 million people .
How many of those people , like Mrs. O'G , never received a single notice that their box was about to be opened , sent to Sacramento and purged of all but financially valuable items ?
State law says that after three years of `` inactivity , '' a box must be drilled and its contents shipped to the controller 's office .
But the law also says that banks , insurance companies or business associations that hold such property MUST attempt to notify the box owner first .
Tell that to Mrs. O'G. She has lived at the same address since 1963 .
Almost every week she has stopped by the same branch , where she 's had a checking account since 1964 .
`` And , unlike me , '' said Mary , `` my mother opens and reads every piece of mail she gets .
If she is n't interested , she shreds it .
There is no way she could have missed ONE , let alone MANY notices . ''
As near as anyone can tell , the last time Mrs. O'G 's safe deposit box was truly safe was in the spring of 1992 .
She opened it so her attorney , Daniel Piccinini , could transfer her PG&E stock to a trust .
That was just about the time the Bank of America was busy taking over Security Pacific , a smaller bank that previously had taken over Gibraltar Savings .
Mr. and Mrs. O'G had leased their safe deposit box from Gibraltar in the early ' 70s .
Sometime in the ' 80s , Mrs. O'G was notified that , thanks to her senior citizen status and certificate of deposit , the box was free for as long as she wanted .
When the Bank of America swallowed Security Pacific , Mrs. O'G had every reason to believe the only change was a positive one : All her financial operations were now under one roof in her long-time Bank of America branch .
What she did n't know was that , by the autumn of ` 92 , her box had been drilled and the contents itemized by the Bank of America in preparation for transfer to Sacramento as unclaimed property .
Through several frustrating visits to the branch and dozens of phone calls to various bank departments and the state Controller 's Office , her daughters recently discovered the awful truth .
`` You ca n't believe the amount of time we 've spent on the phone just trying to speak to a real person , '' Peggy said .
`` One day at the bank , they had my mother sitting there on hold , and it was n't even for the right department .
`` I took one of the bank 's employees aside , and I said , ` This would be a lot easier on her if somebody would just apologize . '
The woman looked at me and said , ` I did n't do it . ' ''
The state Controller 's Office was no picnic either .
When Mary called the agency 's unclaimed property number and explained the situation , `` This woman told me in a monotone that they only handle these cases once a year in November .
I told her again about Mom 's cancer diagnosis and the deed to the cemetery .
She just repeated what she 'd said : ` We only handle these once a year ; you 'll have to call back in November . ' ''
To State Controller Kathleen Connell 's credit , when she heard about Mrs. O'G 's ordeal last week , she immediately ordered an investigation .
`` My heartfelt sympathies go out to this woman and her family , '' Connell said .
`` And if we in any way contributed to their anxieties during this difficult time , we apologize . ''
The Bank of America was not so quick to do the right thing .
In the meantime , Peggy and Mary are now trying to get copies of Mr. and Mrs. O'G 's papers from the Immigration and Naturalization Service .
There are , of course , forms to fill out , a $ 150 fee -- and a waiting period .
Just back from the doctor , Mrs. O'G said late last week : `` All my things are gone ; there 's nothing to be done to get them back .
But maybe knowing about me can help save somebody else this experience .
I mean , if they did this to me , they must have done it to others . ''
-LRB- Stephanie Salter is a columnist for the San Francisco Examiner , P.O. Box 7260 , San Francisco , CA 94120 .
Her electronic mail address is salter -LRB- at -RRB- examiner.com -RRB-
