HONG KONG , May 16 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- British motor-powered ship Cable & Wireless Adventure arrived here for a stopover of a few hours before continuing its around-the-globe journey in a bid to break the world record .
Setting off from Gibraltar on April 19 this year , the 35-meter-long vessel had visited Monte Carlo , Port Said and Male before sailing into Hong Kong 's Victoria Harbor at 11 : 45 Saturday morning .
After the stopover here for additional supply of fuel and water as well as maintenance of the engines , the vessel set sail again later in the afternoon for the journey of 26,000 nautical miles , with a targeted time of 80 days .
it is scheduled to return to Gibraltar on July 3 .
If successful , the vessel would break the current world record of 83 days , nine hours and 54 minutes on a around-the-globe journey by any motor-powered vessel , which was set in 1960 by American submarine USS Trident .
`` We are now only some three hours behind the schedule .
It is quite satisfactory so far as compared with such a long journey , '' said Phil Hagen , director of the project .
The biggest challenge to the ship and its crew is the durability of its equipment , he said .
And he had to make well-schemed arrangement for the consumption and supply of fuel and water on the way .
`` We ca n't sail too fast as it would cost too much fuel .
And if we carry too much fuel , it would add to the ship 's overall weight and thus increase the burden on the machines .
In that case , the engines would soon get too hot to keep running , '' he said .
`` So we had to make a choice and strike a balance on various factors . ''
The toughest sections of the journey are yet to come , he said .
The vessel would undergo a real test when sailing from Yokohama , Japan , to Honolulu later this month and completing the final leg of the journey , from New York to the starting point of Gibraltar , in eight days .
`` There is always something unpredictable on the way , like weather and status of the machine , '' Hagen added .
