BAGHDAD , Iraq
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
At least 400 weapons inspectors and other U.N. staff left Baghdad Wednesday and the United Nations began withdrawing `` nonessential '' staff amid preparations for a possible U.S. military strike .
A convoy of 11 buses and vans carrying more than 100 arms inspectors and their luggage rolled out of the U.N. Special Commission 's headquarters Wednesday morning .
About 300 other U.N. staff -- apparently humanitarian workers -- departed four hours later .
Many of those leaving hugged U.N. workers -- including Iraqi staffers -- who remained behind .
None of U.N. employees would speak with reporters as they boarded the gold , pink and blue buses .
As the vehicles left , U.N. workers were putting screens up over the windows of the headquarters -- a move apparently aimed at preventing glass shattering into the building if there were a military strike .
The U.N. special envoy to Iraq , Prakash Shah , told reporters in Baghdad the world body had decided to withdraw its personnel because of a possible military strike .
Eric Falt , spokesman for U.N. humanitarian programs in Iraq , specified that the withdrawal of all nonessential personnel was `` precautionary . ''
`` In view of uncertainties surrounding the current situation and following instructions from the U.N. headquarters in New York , it has been decided to temporarily relocate nonessential U.N. staff to Amman , Jordan , '' Falt said .
The United States and Britain have warned that military force may be used to try to force Baghdad to back down from its decision to freeze all cooperation with the U.N. Special Commission in charge of arms inspections .
U.S. President Bill Clinton met Tuesday with senior Pentagon officials to explore options for a military attack , and Washington has stepped up the movement of U.S. ships into the region .
Iraq has said it will not cooperate with inspectors until the U.N. Security Council begins moving to lift an embargo imposed after Iraqi forces invaded Kuwait in 1990 , sparking the Gulf War .
The Security Council maintains the embargo wo n't be lifted until U.N. inspectors certify that Iraq has eliminated its weapons of mass destruction .
Shah said when he discussed the withdrawal with Iraq 's deputy prime minister on Wednesday morning , Tariq Aziz had told him Iraq officials would not change their position .
`` They will not be able to desist from their position unless the Security Council takes some action in regard to the sanctions on Iraq , '' Shah said , summing up Aziz 's views .
Before Wednesday 's departures , there were about 120 UNSCOM and IAEA personnel in the country .
There were about 450 humanitarian workers .
Those pulled out Wednesday included not only all UNSCOM staff but monitors for the International Atomic Energy Agency and other U.N. workers who run the oil-for-food program supplying aid to the Iraqi people .
The arms inspectors flew to Bahrain , while others were traveling aboard five buses on the or ten-hour trip across the desert to neighboring Jordan .
The current crisis began in August when Iraq said it would not cooperate with the Special Commission .
It let some personnel continue long-term monitoring , but on Oct. 31 it stopped even that work .
Despite warnings of a military strike by the United States and Britain , Iraqi officials have said they will not back down from their decision to bar the inspectors from working .
Iraq appeared to be turning to other Arab states to head off any attack .
On Tuesday , Iraq 's foreign minister , Mohammed Saeed al- Sahhaf warned that `` any use of military force against Iraq would lead to destabilizing the region . ''
The United States and Britain maintain they have backing in the Middle East for a military strike , but Arab officials have offered no public support for using force .
Jordan 's Prime Minister Fayez Tarawneh , after meeting Wednesday with Saudi Arabia 's Kind Fahd and Crown Prince Abdullah , said the two countries `` are in agreement that the crisis ... should be solved diplomatically . ''
But he added : `` It appears that attempts to defuse the crisis could be late . ''
In New York , Nizar Hamdoon , Iraq 's ambassador to the United Nations , said Tuesday that `` we have to prepare ourself for a strike obviously -- this does not mean that we do n't encourage diplomacy . ''
U.N. chief weapons inspector Richard Butler , interviewed on U.S. television , urged Iraq to face up to the fact that disarmament is connected to sanctions .
`` The key is in its hands -- and it 's called full disclosure to us , '' he said .
