TBILISI , Georgia --
From the sidelines , it may seem like a small war .
But looks are deceiving .
Russia 's latest military conflict in its southern republic of Dagestan has far-reaching implications for the stability of the former superpower and the well-being of the oil-rich Caspian Sea region .
Russia has launched an extensive air and ground campaign to vanquish an Islamic rebel uprising begun two weeks ago -LRB- CQ -RRB- in the remote Caucasus Mountain republic .
With its feeble economy and dilapidated army , Russia is struggling to prevent its southern territory from being nibbled away by guerrilla separatists determined to rid the region of Moscow 's rule .
The latest fighting is essentially a war that began in 1994 .
Russia 's battle with the breakaway republic of Chechnya ended only because it retreated in 1996 , withdrawing its forces which were unable to end the jihad , or holy war .
Chechnya declared independence ; Moscow 's prestige and army were in tatters .
Once again , Russian authorities are facing old foes from Chechnya , who have crossed into the predominately Muslim republic of Dagestan to foment a revolution .
Once again , Moscow is promising to crush the guerrillas with a full-scale military operation of the kind that inflicted heavy civilian casualties but failed to win the war in Chechnya .
In Dagestan , Russian forces suffered their worst single-day losses with 18 soldiers killed and at least 20 wounded on Wednesday , according to the Defense Ministry .
But President Boris Yeltsin and the new prime minister , Vladimir Putin , have vowed to relentlessly protect `` the links in the chain '' that make up the Russian Federation .
But the view from Russia 's southern neighbors in the Caucasus is not a promising one .
For most of this decade , since the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union , civil wars and economic uncertainty have plagued the independent Caucasus republics of Georgia , Armenia and Azerbaijan .
Now , with the fighting in Dagestan , there is concern that the unrest could spread beyond Dagestan 's borders and that a prolonged fight will sap Russia 's already weak economy , ruining the entire region 's promise for security and economic growth .
`` Russia faced a full political and military defeat in Chechnya .
What happens now in Dagestan is extremely dangerous , '' said Peter Mamradze , chief adviser to President Eduard Shevardnadze of Georgia .
`` If it ends badly it will mean bad consequences for the entire region . ''
The United States and its allies have a large stake in what happens should the conflict in Dagestan spread into neighboring states or promote further challenges , from Russia 's far-flung republics to the central authority in Moscow .
Georgia , Azerbaijan , Armenia and Russia 's southern republics form the western rim of one of the world 's largest deposits of oil and natural gas -- the Caspian Sea region .
Western oil companies are developing fields in the Caspian and the United States has bestowed hundreds of millions of dollars in foreign aid and expertise to help the region .
`` This is where the security future of the world will be decided , '' said Alexander Rondeli , a political scientist and advisor to Georgia 's foreign ministry .
`` Whoever wants stability in the world cannot ignore it .
America understands this -- you have to be here in this region , somewhere , somehow . ''
Russia understood the territory 's strategic importance in the 16th century , when Peter the Great annexed the region and began a military campaign to make the northern Caucasus part of the Russian empire .
In the mid-19th century , Russia finally crushed the resistance led in Dagestan by the legendary Imam -LRB- CQ -RRB- Shamil , who dreamed of establishing an Islamic state .
But throughout the Soviet period , the Islamic roots and tightly knit clans of Dagestan and Chechnya survived .
Today , Russia has much at stake in Dagestan .
It is Russia 's oil-pipeline link to the Caspian Sea and is home to Russia 's only all-weather Caspian Sea port .
If oil were n't critical enough , Russian authorities fear that a defeat in Dagestan could produce a `` domino effect '' that would embolden other republics in the Russian Federation to seek independence , or simply drift further from Moscow 's control .
`` Federal power has been weakened to such a degree that for many regional governors it has already turned into a fictional idea , '' human rights activist Boris Pustintsev wrote last week in the Russian daily , the St. Petersburg Times .
Explaining the forceful military reaction to events in Dagestan , he said : `` Yeltsin does not want to go down in history as the man who presided over the destruction of the Russian Federation . ''
But in Moscow , earlier promises have disappeared that the fighting in Dagestan would be over in two weeks or less .
Indeed , the rebels still control at least five villages , including the tiny hamlet of Tando .
And on Thursday , Deputy Interior Minister Lt. Gen. Igor Zubov told the Interfax news agency that the Russians have lost 40 troops and 160 have been wounded since the conflict began in early August .
He claimed that up to 500 rebels had been killed , though the rebels say the figure is hugely exaggerated .
As a result , military authorities now suggest that Russia will have to send at least 10,000 troops -- and perhaps as many as 15,000 -- to force the rebels out of Dagestan and back into neighboring Chechnya .
So far , Russia has sent about 4,000 soldiers and paramilitary forces .
Moscow estimates guerrilla troop strength at up to 1,200 .
But the numbers mean little .
Russia had superior forces in Chechnya only to see its campaign there fail .
In Dagestan , Russia 's conventional forces face similar problems fighting the guerrillas and little time before winter sets in , according to military analysts .
The terrain in Dagestan 's Botlikh region , where the guerrillas have dug in , is extremely isolated and difficult to negotiate .
Furthermore , at the upper altitudes snow will being falling in six weeks or less , limiting visibility for Russian aircraft and artillery and obstructing mountain passes .
Unless commanders have learned the lessons from Chechnya , `` the Russian military may be in for another major disaster , '' warned Pavel Felgenhauer , military affairs correspondent for Russia 's Sevodya newspaper .
Working in Russia 's favor , so far , is little evidence that the uprising in Dagestan has garnered widespread public support among the republic 's 2 million inhabitants .
The fighting is mainly led by Chechen rebel leader Shamil Basayev , a shadowy Jordanian -born commander known as Khattab and their Chechen and Dagestani followers .
The guerrilla movement appears to be relying on the hopes that local discontent with Moscow will prompt their fellow Muslims to join the rebellion rather than ally with Russian forces .
`` Russia is the most unpredictable country in the world right now , and extremist movements are unpredictable by their nature , '' said Revaz Adamia , defense committee chairman of the Georgia parliament .
`` It is difficult to predict , because all the players are unpredictable . ''
But Chechnya 's independence is a model few would want to emulate .
The two-year war wrecked the economy and infrastructure and left rival warlords battling over the ruins the Russians left behind .
While there is a federal government , there is no rule of law .
Organized crime and kidnappings are rampant .
Georgia , a predominately Orthodox Christian country with virtually no armed forces of its own , fears the Islamic militants could turn an eye to its territory , too .
But the more immediate threat comes at the borders it shares with Chechnya and Dagestan .
Officials are concerned that the current fighting could spread to their soil or send tides of refugees into Georgia .
`` And suddenly , you 're involved in the war without any wish to be involved in the war '' said Rondeli , the Georgian political analyst .
At the outset of the Russian campaign , a warplane dropped cluster bombs on a Georgian village near the border with Dagestan .
Russian officials have yet to acknowledge that it was one of their pilots who dropped the bombs and say their investigation into the incident continues .
But more potentially serious is the threat that a defeat in Dagestan poses to the stability of Russia itself .
Georgia 's economy took a beating last August when the Russia was beset by its economic crisis .
Russia represents the largest market for Georgia goods , mainly wine and mineral water .
Despite the two country 's deep political differences -- Georgia has accused `` elements '' in Moscow of being directly linked to several attempts on Shevardnadze 's life -- their economies remain closely linked .
Should Russian forces fail in Dagestan , some Georgian officials wonder if Russia 's other fringe republics would declare open season on Moscow .
And they say the problems are Moscow 's own creation .
Russia 's leaders have retained an imperial view of the former Soviet Union , officials in Georgia complain .
Russia could have more allies and fewer risks had the Russian government from the outset of the fall of communism approached the former Soviet republics , and its own republics that remained in the Russian Federation , as equals instead of subordinates .
Now , it lacks the economic and the military might to impose its will .
`` Still , we do n't wish to see Russia fail .
There is nothing in it for us .
Georgia can be unstable ; that 's not dangerous for Russia , '' said Rondeli .
`` But an unstable Russia is a disaster for Georgia . ''
ENDIT
