WASHINGTON --
President Clinton ordered a `` strong sustained series of air strikes '' against Iraq on Wednesday , defending the attack as unavoidable even as incensed congressional Republicans charged it was politically timed to stave off the resolution to impeach him pending in the House of Representatives .
`` Iraq has abused its final chance , '' Clinton declared in an address to the nation on Wednesday night as Americans watches explosions flash on television and heard Baghdad reverberate with the sound of anti-aircraft fire .
The Pentagon said more than 200 missiles rained down upon Iraq without warning about 24 hours after the chief U.N. weapons inspector reported that President Saddam Hussein was once again thwarting his work .
As Clinton spoke , House Republican leaders , yielding to the eruption in the Iraq crisis , postponed their plans to begin on Thursday the second impeachment debate in American history .
`` We 're going to defer , ` '' said House Speaker -elect Robert Livingston , in careful comments emphasizing support for the troops involved in the exercise .
`` I gave Saddam a chance , not a license , '' Clinton said three hours after U.S. cruise missiles were launched , followed by air strikes by Navy jets from the aircraft carrier Enterprise in the Persian Gulf .
Among the targets were suspected weapons plants , Iraqi intelligence agencies , and fortifications of the military unit known as the Republican Guard , which substantially survived the war with Iraq in 1991 despite weeks of sustained bombing .
Initial reports on Wednesday night suggested that one of Saddam 's marble-clad palaces in Baghdad had also been hit , and that ambulances were seen there .
The attacks were ordered , Clinton said , because of Iraq 's refusal to live up to its promise , after its defeat in the Persian Gulf War , to allow the United Nations to conduct inspections to uncover weapons of mass destruction .
The timing , he insisted , was a strategic decision based on a report delivered Tuesday by Richard Butler , the chairman of the United Nations Special Commission overseeing the disarmament of Iraq .
`` If we had delayed for even a matter of days , '' Clinton insisted , citing the latest reports from U.N. inspectors , `` we would have given Saddam more time to disperse his forces and protect his weapons . ''
His decision was immediately endorsed by the British prime minister , Tony Blair , who denounced Saddam as a `` serial liar . ''
`` Saddam has no intention whatever of keeping to his word , '' said Blair , who committed 12 British Tornado fighter jets and six reconnaissance planes to the raids .
Soon after the first explosions , Saddam confirmed the American attack in a statement to the nation .
`` Resist and fight them , '' he declared .
`` The cowards have bombarded several objectives on Iraqi soil in the belief that they would make you bend . ''
The attack will continue for three to four days , according to Pentagon officials who spoke on condition of anonymity .
While they declined to be precise about the duration , they noted Clinton expressed the nation 's sensitivity to the religious significance of Ramadan , the Muslim holy period that begins this weekend .
The military strike marked a clear policy departure for the administration .
The president had indicated at one point that a major military strike could end efforts to use U.N. inspection to prevent Iraq from building up its arsenals .
Senior American officials said the administration might have to rely on aerial surveillance and keep a large force in the region for several more years , ready to strike again when intelligence reports indicate a need .
There are 24,100 American troops in the gulf region ; 22 warships , eight of them armed with Tomahawk cruise missiles , and 201 military aircraft , according to the Defense Department .
The aircraft carrier Carl Vinson is expected to join the Enterprise in the gulf on Saturday , along with six other warships able to fire cruise missiles .
The president launched the attack on the eve of the House Republican majority 's impeachment move against him after a tumultuous political day in Washington in which Republicans suggested Clinton 's motives in the attack seemed rooted more in his political survival in office than in world security .
As the first missiles were striking Iraq , Senate Majority leader Trent Lott issued a statement questioning `` both the timing and the policy '' behind Clinton 's decision .
The president made one brief allusion to impeachment near the end of his 15-minutes address when he declared : `` Saddam Hussein and other enemies of peace may have thought that the serious debate before the House of Representatives would distract Americans or weaken our resolve to face him down .
But once more , the United States has proven that although we are never eager to use force , when we must act in America 's vital interests , we will do so . ''
The first Tomahawk cruise missiles were fired from six destroyers , one cruiser and an attack submarine at about 11 p.m .
Baghdad time .
They began to hit military and industrial targets across Iraq almost simultaneously two hours later , Pentagon officials said .
The Clinton administration has twice before carried out strikes against Iraq -- in July of 1993 and September of 1996 -- but the attack on Wednesday was described as by far the largest military action in Iraq since the end of the gulf war in 1991 .
The continuing attacks are expected to include 15 B -52 bombers armed with air-launched cruise missiles as well as additional fighters and bombers that Secretary of Defense William Cohen dispatched to the region Wednesday night , including F -117 `` stealth '' attack fighters designed to elude radar .
There were no immediate reports on the effectiveness of the raids nor any definitive word on casualties , although the president said `` unintended '' Iraqi casualties were inevitable and that planners were trying to minimize the chances of injuries to people .
Speaking from the Oval Office , Clinton said the mission of the raids is `` to protect the national interests of the United States and indeed the interests of people throughout the Middle East and around the world . ''
`` Saddam Hussein must not be allowed to threaten his neighbors or the world with nuclear arms , poison gas or biological weapons , '' Clinton declared .
Amid their doubts , other Republicans voiced support for the American forces at risk in the military strike .
But one House leader , Gerald B.H. Solomon , chairman of the Rules Committee , was furious in accusing the president of using the Iraqi air strikes as a political foil to impeachment .
`` It is obvious that he is doing this for political reasons , and I and others are outraged , '' he declared outside the Capitol minutes after receiving word of the air strikes .
But any thought of impeachment as a factor in the military decision was denied by Cohen , a former Republican member of the Senate .
`` I am prepared to place 30 years of public service on the line , '' he said , `` to say the only factor that was important in this decision is what is in the American people 's best interest . ''
Cohen said the raid had been in the works and planned for execution on Wednesday since a previously ordered attack was canceled in November during an earlier confrontation with Saddam .
The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , Gen. Henry Shelton , added , `` Militarily it was the right decision , the right date , and that decision was made back in November . ''
In the domestic furor , critics questioned the timing of the attack , with cynics describing it as a scenario intended to exploit a war mentality as a distraction from domestic politics .
The timing `` smells to high heaven , '' said Lawrence Eagleburger , former secretary of state in the Bush administration who said , however , that tough military action against Iraq was long overdue .
Sandy Berger , Clinton 's national security adviser , said the timing of the attack was related to the latest report from Butler , the chief U.N. weapons inspector , and by the military strategists ' advice that any attack be launched as quickly as possible .
The fact that the president was about to face the threat of impeachment , Berger said , `` would not alter what he saw as his responsibility as president . ''
Retired Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf , the central commander of the gulf war , expressed approval of the latest attack in a television interview , declaring , `` By golly , the troops are committed , and we ca n't have people second guessing the way they did in Vietnam . ''
Lott , who surprised some Republicans with his statement of opposition to an overseas military enterprise , said he favored a `` more clearly defined '' operation , not `` a cursory air strike . ''
Central to this , he said , should be `` the removal of Saddam Hussein from power . ''
He contended that `` this administration has squandered too many opportunities in Iraq . ''
Clinton , however , defended his record as the correct mixture of diplomatic and economic pressures and , finally , force .
`` Mark my words , '' he said of Saddam , `` He will develop weapons of mass destruction .
He will deploy them , and he will use them .
Because we 're acting today , it is less likely that we will face these dangers in the future . ''
Clinton said that even if the U.N. inspectors could stay in Iraq , their work would be `` a sham . ''
`` Saddam 's deception has defeated their effectiveness , '' he said .
`` Instead of the inspectors disarming Saddam , Saddam has disarmed the inspectors . ''
He gave no indication of what Iraq might do to halt the strikes .
Administration officials said later that the raids would continue to completion and there was nothing Iraq could do to curtail them .
` No , they had their chance , '' said Secretary of State Madeleine Albright .
