SEATTLE --
The Asian economic crisis is complicating an already difficult juggling act by the U.S. Pacific Command to protect American security interests while promoting regional stability in east Asia , experts warned at a Seattle conference Wednesday .
While no immediate crisis threatens to escalate into military hostilities , longstanding tensions between the Koreas , internal upheavals in Indonesia and economic stagnation in Japan all pose threats to the U.S. military 's policy of constructive engagement with its counterparts in those countries , a panel of Asian political analysts said .
And a senior Army general warned the nuclear competition between India and Pakistan could be a harbinger of increased development of weapons of mass destruction by regimes throughout the Asia - Pacific basin .
`` There are a lot of armed forces in this area and they have a lot of nasty weapons , '' Maj. Gen. Stephen Silvasy told a session of the `` East Asia in Crisis '' conference .
Silvasy , deputy commander of the U.S. Army Pacific command , said the recent round of nuclear tests in south Asia wo n't be the last .
`` I do n't know where the next nuclear weapons will show up but I know they will show up , '' he said .
Silvasy noted the multi-service Pacific Command headquartered in Hawaii controls 330,000 U.S. military personnel , including about 100,000 based in Japan , South Korea and aboard Navy warships .
It is responsible for military operations from the U.S. West Coast to the east coast of Africa , a vast region spanning 105 million square miles that contains two-thirds of the world 's population , 41 countries and the world 's six largest military forces , he said .
The economic downturn in Asia threatens to weaken a number of U.S. -led programs and diplomatic initiatives in the region that aim to bolster security , speakers said .
They include : _North Korea 's nuclear program : North Korea recently threatened to walk out on a 1994 agreement in which an international consortium supported by the United States , Japan and South Korea agreed to replace Soviet -designed nuclear reactors that generated bomb-quality warhead material with newer reactors that do not create plutonium .
_Regional military forces : The collapse of currency values and budget cuts have halted military modernization efforts and training exercises with the United States on the part of several counties , including Thailand , Indonesia and South Korea .
Most countries in the region fear further declines may tempt China in the future to act unilaterally in several disputed areas such as the oil-rich Spratley Islands in the South China Sea .
_Support for U.S. forces : Japan and South Korea face financial pressures that could prompt them to reduce payments for U.S. military units stationed there , nations , which in turn could lead for calls in Congress to withdraw U.S. units from east Asia .
Japan currently pays the United States $ 4 billion annually , about 90 percent of the cost of basing American units there .
Civilian and military speakers agreed the military component of the Asian situation is intertwined with economic and political trends .
Silvasy noted that Adm. Joe Prueher , commander-in-chief of Pacific Command , receives a daily briefing on the Asian financial markets along with his normal fare of military intelligence and operational information .
Not all signs are negative , security experts said .
China has in recent years implemented a number of `` confidence-building measures '' to downplay concerns that the People 's Liberation Army is preparing to intervene outside the mainland , said Sheldon Simon , a security specialist at the Center for Asian Studies at Arizona State University .
While concluding China is sending mixed signals on military modernization to the rest of the region , particularly with its 1995 missile tests in the Taiwan Strait , Beijing has taken several steps to open up its military exercises to outside observers , he said .
The two-day conference was presented by the National Bureau of Asian Research and the Strategic Studies Institute of the U.S. Army War College .
