WASHINGTON --
President Clinton on Wednesday ordered substantial new forces to the Persian Gulf , including B -1 and B -52 bombers , and warned President Saddam Hussein of Iraq that he was prepared to strike without further warning .
He also dispatched 4,000 ground troops to defend Kuwait in case of an Iraqi attack .
Clinton said in a Veterans Day speech that the United States would be compelled to act unless Iraq immediately permits the resumption of United Nations inspections of its weapons facilities .
`` A failure to respond could embolden Saddam to act recklessly , signaling to him that he can with impunity develop these weapons of mass destruction or threaten his neighbors , '' Clinton told several hundred military officers and veterans at Arlington National Cemetery .
The President said that inaction in the face of continuing provocation from Saddam would permanently damage the credibility of the United Nations , which on Wednesday withdrew virtually all of its inspection officers from Iraq in anticipation of a major American attack .
The President delivered his most extensive remarks on the current impasse with Baghdad as part of a concerted Administration effort to portray the United States as resolute and prepared to act at any time to punish Saddam .
William Cohen , the secretary of Defense , announced a major buildup of air and ground forces in the region , including the ground troops being sent to defend Kuwait .
The secretary of state and the chairman of the joint chiefs both delivered public warnings that military action was imminent if Saddam did not back down .
Clinton said that if Iraq were permitted to resume work on chemical , biological and nuclear weapons , it could quickly restore its capacity to imperil its citizens and its neighbors with weapons of mass destruction .
`` If the inspectors are not permitted to visit suspect sites or monitor compliance at known production facilities , they may as well be in Baltimore , not Baghdad , '' Clinton said .
`` That would open a window of opportunity for Iraq to rebuild its arsenal of weapons and delivery system in months -- and I say again -- in months , not years . ''
As Clinton spoke , more than 230 U.N. inspection agents left Baghdad for their personal safety ; an additional 41 officials from other agencies were scheduled to leave on Thursday .
The State Department withdrew non-essential personnel from Israel and Kuwait to protect them from possible Iraqi retaliation for an American military strike .
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright delayed for a day , until Friday , her scheduled departure for an Asian - Pacific economic summit in Malaysia .
She also switched from her usual airplane to a special Department of Defense flying command center known as the Doomsday Plane , capable of secure communications with U.S. forces anywhere on the globe .
She used the same airplane in August when she traveled to Africa at the time the Administration was in the final stages of planning missile strikes in retaliation for embassy bombings in Kenya and Tanzania .
Clinton earlier this week pushed back his departure for the economic conference , giving him more time to participate in deliberations on the Iraq crisis .
White House officials said that the President could cancel his trip if he decides to use force against Baghdad .
Albright said that even as additional forces flow into the region , the United States is ready to act at any time .
In addition to the attack planes and ground forces ordered to the gulf Wednesday , the aircraft carrier Enterprise and its battle group are en route to the region , and are expected to arrive Nov. 23 .
`` We see no need for further warnings , '' Ms. Albright said in an interview with reporters and editors of The New York Times .
Clinton said that although he is willing to mount a punishing military attack against Iraq , he still would prefer a peaceful solution to the current crisis .
He said that intrusive inspection of Iraqi weapons sites is more effective than bombing in corralling Saddam 's military ambitions .
`` We continue to hope -- indeed , pray -- that Saddam will comply , '' Clinton said .
`` But we must be prepared to act if he does not . ''
The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , Gen. Henry H. Shelton , said Wednesday that Saddam has been sufficiently warned of the consequences of continuing to defy the United States and the U.N. `` He understands that all options remain on the table today , '' Shelton said on NBC 's `` Today '' program , `` that we have tried over the years to get him to comply with U.N. resolutions and to honor these commitments ; that he does , in fact , pose a threat to an area that is a vital national interest to
American officials said that the aim of any military strike would be to destroy Iraq 's weapons plants and depots , weaken its offensive capability and persuade Saddam to submit to international inspections once more .
Officials have said that Saddam would not be specifically targeted for death because assassination of foreign leaders is prohibited by presidential order .
But Albright said pointedly on Wednesday , as she has in the past , that the United States `` would look forward to working with a successor regime '' in Baghdad .
Despite the threats and the growing American military strike force in the region , there is no assurance that military action will accomplish the administration 's goals .
The Persian Gulf war of 1991 did not curtail Saddam 's weapons programs , even though more than 500,000 American troops and 2,000 aircraft were employed in a campaign that inflicted serious damage on Iraq and its army .
Two small-scale American military strikes , in 1993 and 1996 , likewise did not significantly degrade Saddam 's military capability .
In fact , American intelligence analysts said that they believed that American attacks had strengthened Saddam 's political position within Iraq .
Shelton said that the attacks being contemplated this time would be more effective than past efforts because the United States today has better weapons , better technology and better intelligence than it had even eight years ago .
Shelton also defended the conduct of the gulf war , even though it left Saddam in power and in a position to resume work on his arsenal .
`` I would also say that the objectives of the Gulf war were met , '' he said .
`` We did , in fact , reduce the threat that Saddam Hussein posed .
We stopped that war only after he agreed to the commitments that he now is failing to honor . ''
Administration officials said that they felt a sense of urgency about acting against Iraq for several reasons .
The United States and its allies do not want to let Saddam go unpunished for long for halting weapons inspections on Oct. 31 , a senior administration official said , speaking on the condition of anonymity .
The United Nations , including such normally balky allies as France and Russia , refuses to defend Saddam in this latest crisis or negotiate some way out for him .
But many countries are increasingly sensitive to the human suffering caused by the harsh sanctions regime imposed on Iraq after the Gulf war and are seeking some honorable way to lift the limitations on trade with Baghdad .
Clinton on Wednesday repeated the longstanding administration policy -- that the United States will support the end of sanctions when Iraq is certified to be free of weapons of mass killing and the missiles to deliver them .
`` Now if Saddam Hussein is really serious about wanting sanctions lifted , there is an easy way to demonstrate that .
Let UNSCOM do its job without interference ; fully comply , '' Clinton said at Arlington , referring to the U.N. special commission responsible for the weapons inspections .
`` The international community is united that Saddam must not have it both ways by keeping his weapons of mass destruction capability and still getting rid of sanctions . ''
