BRUSSELS , Belgium --
An end to the heaviest fighting in Europe since World War II grew nearer Thursday after Yugoslav generals Wednesday night signed a NATO -dictated plan to withdraw from Kosovo .
The signing set in motion a peace plan that is to end NATO bombing of Yugoslavia , trigger the advance of an international military force into the war-torn province and allow the return of many of the 800,000 ethnic Albanian refugees who fled before President Slobodan Milosevic 's Serb nationalist troops .
The U.N. Security Council in New York prepared to consider a resolution mandating the multinational force .
Assuming Chinese objections can be quieted , a vote on the measure was expected as soon as NATO suspended its 78-day bombardment of the Balkan nation .
NATO was looking for the Yugoslav withdrawal to be in full swing by daybreak , and the allies planned to check on its progress with reconnaissance flights and by other intelligence means .
As soon as the beginning of the pullout can be verified , NATO Secretary - General Javier Solana was to announce suspension of hostile air operations .
Although key moves in the Yugoslav withdrawal are to be accomplished in a day or two , NATO agreed to give Belgrade 11 days , instead of the originally planned seven , to completely take its 40,000-strong force -- military , paramilitary and police -- out of the war-torn province .
The Yugoslav troops are to withdraw 15 miles within Serbia .
The signing of the withdrawal agreement was announced by Lt. Gen. Michael Jackson , the Briton who will lead the international force , at Kumanovo air base in Macedonia near the Kosovo border .
Talks there had proceeded haltingly since Saturday .
Jackson , who signed for NATO , said Yugoslav generals Svetozar Marjanovic and Obrad Stevanovic signed for the Milosevic government .
Nebojsa Vujovic , the Yugoslav deputy foreign minister who participated in the talks , said his nation will `` fulfill each and every obligation '' of the agreement .
In any case , Jackson warned : `` I have made it clear that if subsequently the withdrawal timetable is breached , the agreement requires the air operation to resume . ''
News of the signing evoked relief and cautious optimism in NATO nations and volleys of celebratory gunfire in Belgrade , the Yugoslav capital .
Although the signing represented a victory for NATO , Jackson said it was `` time to look ahead . ''
`` The fact that this document has now been agreed represents the hopes of a better future in which we can rebuild Kosovo and restore some normality to the lives of its ordinary citizens regardless of their ethnic background , '' Jackson said .
It will be a Herculean task , as Jackson acknowledged , given the ancient ethnic hatreds that suffuse the Balkans and the devastated infrastructure left by Serb troops and the NATO bombing .
Land mines planted by Serb forces and unexploded ordnance from the allied bombardment are only two of the obstacles .
As part of the withdrawal agreement , the Yugoslav military agreed to turn over by Friday its records of land mines , booby traps and remaining ammunition stocks .
Many of the refugees are expected to return to personal horror stories -- burned-out houses and barns , wrecked farm equipment and , most disheartening , missing relatives .
Moving into Kosovo quickly behind the multinational military force will be agents from the international tribunal established by the United Nations to investigate war crimes in the former Yugoslavia .
They already have reports of wholesale killing and rape by Serb forces and mass graves in Kosovo .
The tribunal , based in The Hague , Netherlands , indicted Milosevic and a handful of his high command during the NATO bombardment .
The U.N. resolution `` demands full cooperation '' by the international military with the tribunal .
Under the Security Council resolution , U.N. Secretary - General Kofi Annan is to appoint a civilian administrator for Kosovo to develop an autonomous government .
Although the resolution recognizes Yugoslav sovereignty over Kosovo , the influence of the Milosevic regime there is expected to be minimal .
In the Yugoslav heartland of Serbia , Milosevic remains in power .
His strongest challenge ahead may come from even more nationalistic figures , and Milosevic may have to answer for the presence of foreign troops in Kosovo .
Although the province recently has been inhabited primarily by ethnic Albanians who are Muslims , it is the site of orthodox Christian shrines and is considered the seat of the Serb patrimony .
As the pullout approached , concern grew that the estimated 100,000 ethnic Serbs still in Kosovo may feel so threatened that they may flee north into Serbia , complicating military movements .
The final turn in the withdrawal talks was first signaled in Cologne , Germany , where Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer said NATO had agreed to strike from the plan a provision allowing 24 hours between the verification of the beginning of a Yugoslav pullout and the entry of the multinational force .
Yugoslav leaders feared a daylong lag would give an advantage to rebels in the Kosovo Liberation Army to attack departing Serbs and to strengthen beachheads throughout the province .
President Clinton , in a statement issued by the White House , cautioned the KLA `` not to hinder '' the withdrawal , a point already agreed by rebel leaders .
NATO has said Serb forces have the right to defend themselves if fired on by rebels during the withdrawal .
But Yugoslav military officials have been warned to prevent additional pillaging of Kosovo by their departing forces .
Another disagreement in the endgame focused on the number of Yugoslav forces that would be allowed to return as a token presence in the province .
NATO stuck to its demand that the number be in the hundreds rather than the thousands proposed by Belgrade .
In addition to the initial withdrawal of armed personnel , by Thursday night , Yugoslavia is to end military flights over Kosovo and stop all air defense .
Within three days , all Yugoslav air defense materiel is to be removed from the province .
The withdrawal talks , over two days , were as fitful as any of the diplomatic maneuvers during the 11-week conflict .
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright , during a CNN interview Wednesday afternoon , seemed barely able to contain her irritation at the continuing delays .
`` It is up to the Serbs to agree to the military-technical agreement and take the first step , which is to begin the withdrawal , '' Albright said .
`` They are the ones who caused this .
They must take the first step .
That is how the catch-22 becomes uncaught . ''
Albright was in Cologne , where she and other foreign ministers were preparing for the annual summit of the Group of Eight nations next week .
On Tuesday the ministers from the United States , Russia , Britain , Canada , France , Germany , Italy and Japan , agreed on the U.N. resolution on Kosovo .
German government and military officials said the NATO bombing campaign effectively ended Wednesday morning , although spokesmen at alliance headquarters in the Belgian capital as well as White House officials argued that the air strikes were ongoing .
`` Our position has not changed one iota , '' said NATO spokesman Jamie Shea .
He said that on Tuesday allied jets flew 523 sorties , including 130 strike missions , 56 of which were directed at Yugoslav air defense positions .
All manned NATO craft returned safely to their bases , but a drone plane was downed , said NATO military spokesman Walter Jertz , a German army major general .
Tanjug , the Yugoslav government news agency , said Wednesday afternoon that a unit of `` anti-terrorist '' police had already been withdrawn from Kosovo .
It did not say how many troops were involved in the departure .
Even as the talks continued , NATO stepped up preparations to move into the province as KFOR , for `` Kosovo force . ''
Massed in Macedonia , just south of Kosovo , were 17,500 troops , about one-third of the total 50,000 expected to flood into the province over a few weeks .
That does not include whatever force Russia may decide to put into the operation .
NATO 's political arm , the North Atlantic Council , has approved the operational plan for KFOR , the first step in the deployment .
A second session will be called to approve the activation orders to send the forces into Kosovo .
Shea said some units were under orders to be prepared to move in four hours .
The first unit across the border is expected to be engineers who will examine and secure the road to Pristina , the provincial capital which Jackson will use as his forward headquarters .
Jackson 's headquarters staff was under orders to be prepared to move within 24 hours .
Other NATO troops will be working to identify the safest routes and safest areas that can be used by the first refugees .
The force will also check on how U.N. and private international aid agencies can help the estimated 500,000 Kosovar Albanians displaced within the province .
XXXX END OF STORY
