ABU DHABI , May 21 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Iraq 's return to the Arab forces will contribute to the security in the Gulf region , said a leading UAE military official whose speech was published here today .
Lt. General Sheikh bin Zayed al Nahyan , chief of staff of the UAE Armed Forces , pointed out `` There is a lack of strategic balance in the Gulf area , especially due to the absence of Iraq . ''
The situation is difficult to be changed at present or in the near future even if Iraq comes back with its full force , but Iraq 's return to the Arab and international forces is still vital to the stability of the region , the general added .
Military experts here said the general 's speech is likely to be a hint to strengthen Gulf Arab countries ' military power along with Iraq 's come-back to face Iran , a long-term potential threat claimed by most of the Gulf states .
Iran 's military power has been reinforced since the 1991 Gulf war and its recent mock battles have caused serious concerns among the Gulf states , the experts said .
On May 11 , Iran began a several-day military exercise in the Gulf and the Sea of Oman , close to the Strait of Hormuz which is an important thoroughfare for oil exporting from the region .
Diplomats here believed the military power of the Gulf states is obviously not enough to encounter Iran due to their limited human resources .
`` A Peninsula Shield is never able to halt moves by millions of Iranian troops , '' they said .
To defend the security of the region , the Gulf states set up coalition forces named Peninsula Shield in early 1990 .
The troops are composed of less than 20,000 soldiers .
The diplomats said that before the 1990 's Iraqi invasion of Kuwait , the Gulf countries could protect themselves through supporting Iraq , a major military contender for Iran in the region .
The two sides tied in an eight-year war which broke out in 1980 .
However , Iraq 's military machine has been paralyzed under the pressure of U.N. arms destruction resolutions and trade sanctions since the 1991 Gulf war .
The Gulf countries are depending on a large foreign presence , particularly that of the U.S. and its western allies , to face Iran 's threats , experts said .
But it is only a makeshift arrangement , they added .
The UAE chief of staff said that the westerners will sooner or later withdraw from the Gulf region due to economic reasons .
More than 65 percent of the world 's oil is exported daily from the Gulf region , thus linking the interest of the world to the area , he said .
Foreign presence in the Gulf will disappear as soon as their interests cease to exist , he said .
`` They came to the area because of economic reasons and will leave also due to economic reasons , '' he added .
