MANILA , January 14 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The Philippines has pushed the development of its tourism industry during the past few years .
However , the country still has a long way to go before becoming a most popular destination in Asia .
Tourism Secretary Mina Gabor recently reported to President Fidel Ramos that , for the first time , annual tourist arrivals in the country broke a two-million record last year , posting the highest growth rate of 16.6 percent in the Asia Pacific region .
`` We expect to generate something like 2.7 billion U.S. dollars out of the 2.05 million arrivals , which will represent 5.23 percent of the gross domestic product -LRB- GDP -RRB- of the country , '' she said .
Gabor said that tourism has become one of the country 's important earners of foreign exchange .
Its income ranked second only to the remittances from overseas Filipino contract workers , which totaled 7 billion dollars last year .
She added statistics from the World Tourism Organization -LRB- WTO -RRB- also showed that the country ranked the highest in tourism receipts per tourist arrival , with visitors spending some 1,653 dollars per visit as compared to Europe and the United States which recorded an average of only 708 dollars .
The industry also helped ease up the high unemployment pressure of the country by creating some 1.11 million jobs last year , an increase of 28 percent over 1995 , she said .
Actually , tourism in the Philippines has enjoyed consistent growth in the last four years , in terms of both tourist arrival and revenue .
Gabor attributed this positive trend to political stability , economic growth and social progress the country has achieved as well as the marketing and promotional programs launched by her department in the past few years .
However , she was also aware that it was easier for the country to attain the highest growth rate than other countries , because it has a low starting point .
Before Ramos was sworn into office in 1992 , years of political turmoil and high crime rate had resulted in the stagnant development of the country 's tourism .
Although the Philippines stepped up last year to the 12th position in the standings of most visited countries and regions in Asia , it was still far behind Hong Kong , Malaysia and Thailand .
To face up to the challenge , the Philippines decided to push harder the development of its tourism .
Before the end of last year , the Department of Tourism intensified its campaign to encourage more banks to extend loans to entrepreneurs involved in tourism-related projects .
Until now , various banks in the country have pledged about 2.5 billion pesos -LRB- 95 million dollars -RRB- for the infrastructure development of the industry .
Political stability and economic growth have also set a favorable climate for foreign investors .
The Lotus Hotels and Resorts from the United States and the Australia -based Kemayan Hotels and Leisure Ltd. are putting the Philippines as their entry point in Asia .
The World Bank also pledged to provide assistance to tourism infrastructure in the country , the first time in 20 years .
While attracting more investments into the industry , the country also doubled its effort in tourism infrastructure .
It upgraded five airports in Clark , Subic , Davao , Laoag and Cebu into international ones last year .
This year , it has identified 27 priority destinations and tourist attractions nationwide as `` flagship projects '' of the government .
To lure more visitors to the country known for white beaches and deep waters , the Philippines launched a series of tours with its own characteristics , including adventure tours such as cave exploring , whale or bird watching and diving , as well as theme tours like `` the Islands Philippines '' , `` Visit the Best of the Islands Philippines '' and `` Bring Home a Friend '' .
Last year , the hosting of the Asian Pacific Economic Cooperation forum brought more than 10,000 visitors to the country .
To keep the momentum , the country recently came up with the `` Convention City of Manila '' campaign to revive Manila 's image as a famous convention and exhibition city .
So far the Philippines has succeeded in bidding for seven international events which include the World Media Summit , the World Police Forum , the World Congress on Higher Education , the World Children 's Summit and the World Tourism Leaders ' Meeting .
Gabor said her department is also concentrating on a `` roots program '' to attract tourists from North America , particularly the young people of Filipino descent , to visit the country and familiarize themselves with their parents ' culture and tradition .
The secretary predicted that the tourist industry will continue its vigorous growth this year .
She said the Philippines was targeting 2.32 million tourists arrivals with an estimated income of 3.2 billion dollars and 1.3 million new jobs .
