Military factors still occupy an important position in state security .
In the new international security environment , while stressing the settlement of disputes through political , economic and diplomatic means , most countries still regard military means and the reinforcement of military strength as important ways to safeguard their own security and national interests .
A profound reform in the military field led by the development of high-tech weapons is taking place throughout the world .
This reform , which is developing rapidly , will exert an important and profound influence on weaponry , military system and setup , combat training and military theory .
To adapt to the new situation and strive for their own advantages , many countries have readjusted their defense policies and military strategies , reduced the scale of armaments and paid more attention to improving the quality of their armed forces .
Economic security is becoming daily more important for state security .
In international relations , geopolitical , military security and ideological factors still play a role that cannot be ignored , but the role of economic factors is becoming more outstanding , along with growing economic contacts among nations .
The competition to excel in overall national strength , focused on economy and science and technology , is being further intensified ; globewide struggles centered on markets , natural resources and other economic rights and interests are daily becoming sharper ; and the quickening of economic globalization and intensification of the formation of regional blocs render the economic development of a country more vulnerable to outside influences and impacts .
Therefore , more and more countries regard economic security as an important aspect of state security .
The financial crisis in Asia has made the issue of economic security more prominent , and has set out a new task for governments of all countries to strengthen coordination and face challenges together in the course of economic globalization .
The political security situation in the Asia - Pacific region is relatively stable .
The development of the trend toward multipolarity in this region is being quickened , and the relations among the big nations are being readjusted strategically and gradually becoming stable .
Despite the emergence of a financial crisis in Asia , the Asia - Pacific region remains one of the areas with the greatest economic development vitality in the world , and developing the economy is the most important task for each country .
The countries in the Asia - Pacific region rely more and more on each other economically , and , to solve their disputes by peaceful means , to stress the search for the meeting points of their common interests and to strengthen cooperation and coordination are becoming the main current of the relations among the countries of the region .
Various forms of regional and sub-regional multilateral cooperation are constantly being developed , and security dialogues and cooperation are being carried out at many levels and through many channels .
