MANILA , October 27 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Currencies and stock markets in Asia are rising , interest rates in the region are coming down , and money managers are taking cautious steps back into Asia .
Are these hints of an economic recovery in Asia ?
No doubt , these could be described as encouraging signs of a recovery .
At least , financial panic has subdued now and markets are stabilizing .
Asian currencies have been rebounding sharply against the U.S. dollar recently .
On Monday , the Indonesian rupiah and the Philippine peso strengthened sharply against the dollar .
The dollar was quoted at 7,425 rupiah at the close Monday , while the peso rose to 41.625 from 42.05 Friday , the highest level since Mid - July .
Over the past month , the Singapore dollar has appreciated nearly 6 percent against the dollar .
Another hopeful sign is that interest rates in Asian countries have fallen sharply .
Inter -bank rates are as low as 7 percent in Malaysia .
Since July , South Korea 's have fallen by 8 percentage points to 8.6 percent , and Thailand 's have tumbled from 22 percent to 9.2 percent .
The interest rate cuts will certainly help reduce borrowing cost of companies and promote production in Asia , analysts said .
These positive developments in the Asian economy could be largely attributed to a surprise U.S. interest rate cut , the Japanese yen 's abrupt surge and the dollar sales by hedge funds which were forced to unwind positions as banks trim credit lines .
Economists said that if the dollar 's fall is sustained , it would reduce dollar debts in local currency terms , and a dear yen would help those economies like South Korea 's , which compete head-on with Japanese producers .
However , the positive developments in the Asian economy do not indicate that a recovery is already in sight .
In fact , there are still lots of obstacles to an early recovery .
In its `` World Economic Outlook '' released earlier this month , the International Monetary Fund -LRB- IMF -RRB- said that the downturn of the Asian economy has accelerated far faster than expected , with many of the regional economies in `` deep recession . ''
The fall in Asian currencies in the past 17 months has failed to spark a boom in export revenues , since not so many people in Asia are buying and prices are falling , it said .
Falling interest rates have failed to ease the regionwide credit crunch , in part because banks are busy disposing of bad loans , and wary of new commitments , the IMF said .
Clyde Prestowiz , president of the U.S. -based Economic Strategy Institute , said that unless Asian countries increase domestic spending , there will not be enough demand for the region 's products because of weakening consumption around the world .
Even if the encouraging trend in the financial market will continue , a huge collapse in gross domestic product this year could hardly be prevented in some Asian countries , many economists said .
The latest poll by the Economist magazine shows that output will fall by 7-8 percent this year in Thailand and South Korea , 16 percent in Indonesia .
GDP is also expected to fall in Singapore and the Philippines .
Although IMF predicted earlier that most Asian economies will bottom out in the first half of 1999 , with growth resuming in the second half , many things might blow this forecast off course , such as a recession in America , analysts said .
At present , the most basic element which is affecting Asia 's recovery is the reduction in foreign investments .
The five most troubled East Asian economies -- South Korea , Thailand , Indonesia , Malaysia , and the Philippines -- have experienced an estimated net outflow of private capital of 25 billion dollars this year , compared with a net inflow of 94 billion dollars in 1996 .
Foreign investments in Nine ASEAN countries have fallen by 33.6 percent since the Asian financial crisis erupted in July 1997 , according to ASEAN documents .
The huge non-performing debts of Asian banks is also hampering the region 's recovery .
Deutsche Bank estimated that non-performing loans amount to 35 percent or more of total bank lending in Indonesia , Malaysia , South Korea and Thailand .
Economic recovery is unlikely to get fully under way until banks start lending again , economists said .
Another big obstacle to Asia 's recovery is the massive burden of both domestic and foreign debts .
The East Asian nations ' foreign debts are , on average , equivalent to more than 70 percent of GDP , even bigger than Latin America 's foreign debts of 55 percent of GDP in its crisis in the early 1980s .
At the meantime , they also have huge burden of domestic debts .
It is estimated that total debts amount to 200 percent of GDP in Thailand , Malaysia , Indonesia and South Korea .
Because of huge debts , banks ' non-performing loans may increase further , hampering recovery in the region .
All these problems are hindering an early economic recovery in Asia , and Asia 's road toward a recovery will be very rough , analysts said .
