<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Subic Bay , Philippines , November 24 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Four years after American troops pulled out of here , leaders of the 18 Asia - Pacific Economic Cooperation -LRB- APEC -RRB- economies will gather in Subic Bay Freeport on November 25 to firm up action plans that will establish free trade and investment in the region over the next century .</ENAMEX>
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">With the help of 8,000 volunteers , Subic Bay Metropolitan Authority Chairman Richard Gordon has turned the former Subic Naval Base into a free port with its own airport , seaport , satellite system , highway and bustling tourism .
`` Subic achieved what no other city had done , '' said Gordon .
`` We built an airport , an all-optic-fiber telecommunications network , a water and sewerage system , a satellite system , a new highway , and with the investment of 237 large companies , a cyberspace infrastructure and a 116-megawatt power plant all with four years ! ''
The Subic Bay is celebrating its fourth anniversary of the end of 94 years of American presence as leaders of the APEC member economies converge here to hold their Fourth Informal Leadership Meeting .</ENAMEX>
Gordon said the most important thing Subic could present to the APEC leaders `` is the character of the people who rebuilt this facility . ''
Philippine President Fidel Ramos , in choosing the Subic free port as the venue for the APEC leaders ' gathering , is to showcase the new character of the Philippines .
The free port also represents the APEC 's ideal of free trade .
Business here goes by the global standard in terms of speed and time .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Much has changed since the last American troops were stationed in this former naval base , the largest outside the United States .
Military installations such as ammunition bunkers , repair hangars , barracks and housing for American soldiers now fuel Subic 's economy , giving jobs to thousands and turning this former naval facility into a prime industrial and commercial center in the Philippines .
The old repair hangar used by the U.S. Air Force is now a 12 million- U.S. -dollar international airport passenger terminal , while the runway used by U.S. jets has been widened and can now accommodate Boeing -747 jets and giant cargo planes .
The Philippines has implemented a detailed master plan to convert the U.S. base into a free port , which coincided with the APEC meeting .</ENAMEX>
