MANILA , September 7 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- When the Philippine government and the separatist Moro National Liberation Front -LRB- MNLF -RRB- signed a historic peace accord one year ago , many believed that the main southern island of Mindanao would embark on a road to peace and prosperity from then on .
But the past 12 months showed that peace and development have eluded Mindanao , where the nearly 20 million population has grown so familiar with war and poverty .
Indeed , the landmark peace agreement has made a positive impact on the region , home to 14 million Christians and six million Bangsamoro people or Philippine Muslims .
The peace accord ended the 24-year-long bitter war between the government troops and the MNLF , which had claimed nearly 120,000 and caused more than 30 million U.S. dollars in economic losses .
Under the accord , the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao -LRB- ARMM -RRB- , composed of four provinces , was set up with MNLF chairman Nur Misuari as its governor .
The Southern Philippines Council for Peace and Development -LRB- SPCPD -RRB- was also created to oversee peace and development in the ARMM and other 10 southern provinces and nine cities .
To help develop war-battered infrastructure in Mindanao , the government nearly doubled its budget for the SPCPD -covered provinces this year and did a lot to lure foreign investors into the region .
Nevertheless , the peace agreement failed to silence guns in the region , and an economic boom as predicted by the government and the rebel-turned governor Misuari remains a distant dream of the Mindanao people .
Just one month after the signing of the accord , the fragile peace was shattered after another Muslim rebel group , the Moro Islamic Liberation Front -LRB- MILF -RRB- , attacked some military posts to remind the government of their influence on the peace process .
The MILF , a breakaway faction of the MNLF but more radical , has been strongly opposed to the Manila - MNLF peace agreement .
The skirmishes between the military and the MILF escalated to a large-scale conflict in late June this year , during which the military seized the MILF 's second largest stronghold in Cotabato province .
The three weeks of conflict claimed lives of more than 100 people , including some civilians , and displaced more than 70,000 residents , many of whom have refused to return for fear of a flare-up of the war .
The military and the MILF later reached an initial truce accord with the mediation of Misuari .
But both sides failed to agree on principles on a general truce in their seventh round of initial peace talks early this month .
Apart from the MILF , some extremist Muslim groups such as Abu Sayyaf have also refused to open peace talks with Manila and mounted terrorist attacks on government troops in southern Mindanao from time to time .
Meanwhile , rampant kidnap-for-ransom syndicates struck hard in Mindanao despite a massive presence of anti-kidnapping forces in the region , forcing many local businessmen to live a secluded life or flee the island .
As a result of the unstable law and order situation , many potential domestic and foreign investors are staying away from Mindanao , which had already been neglected for decades .
Lack of the badly-needed investments made the hopes of economic development in Mindanao dim .
When the peace accord was signed , officials in Manila confidently predicted that the Mindanao economy would be soon on the verge of take-off with investors flocking to the resource-rich region .
Many foreign business delegations did visit the region and show great interest in tapping opportunities there , but few of them have actually taken follow-up actions .
According official figures , foreign investors committed nearly 60 billion pesos -LRB- two billion U.S. dollars -RRB- of investments in some 200 projects in Mindanao during the period between September 1995 and this April .
But only one sixth of them had already been disbursed .
An official at the SPCPD regional investment board explains that both foreign and domestic investors still maintain a wait-and-see attitude , due to insecurity , poor infrastructure and lack of skilled workers .
A failure to show peace dividends -- stability and economic miracle -- as promised to the Mindanao people has , in turn , taken its toll on the trust in Misuari and the peace agreement itself .
Wide dissatisfaction is growing among Misuari 's followers , especially within the MNLF camp , at the slow progress in the implementation of the peace accord .
Under the deal , 7,500 of the nearly 30,000 MNLF members should be integrated into the government troops and the national police force .
Others can get a job with the government-sponsored livelihood programs after being disarmed .
But during the past year , only 1,100 MNLF members were made regulars .
Among those disarmed , many remain unemployed due to lack of livelihood projects .
As a result , thousands of disgruntled MNLF men have reportedly defected to the MILF camp .
The current peace initiative may lose steam if the government and Misuari fail to show peace dividends to Mindanao in coming years , political observers here warn .
