MANILA , October 13 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Over three months after a financial crisis hit Southeast Asia , a currency market recovery is still a long journey for the region , from where investors are continuing to shift their funds to other places due to loss of confidence .
Last week , Southeast Asian currencies were broadly stronger against the U.S. dollar and some people predicted that a recovery in the region 's foreign exchange markets is on the way .
Such a prediction seems too optimistic because there are a number of factors which pushed regional currencies higher last week .
During the week , profit-taking in the dollar boosted the Malaysian Ringgit and Singapore dollar ; Indonesia 's decision to seek assistance from the International Monetary Fund -LRB- IMF -RRB- led to the buying of the country 's rupiah ; and the Philippine Central Bank 's restrictions on dollar holdings forced local banks to buy pesos .
Economic analysts warned that the rising trend is unlikely to sustain as investors are still lacking confidence in the region 's economies .
Soon after a currency turmoil spread across Southeast Asia in early July , countries in the region took a series of emergency measures to stabilize the market , such as raising interest rates and imposing restrictions on foreign exchange trading .
However , these measures have not succeeded in containing the sharp fall of regional currencies .
Since July , the currencies of Singapore , Malaysia , Indonesia , Thailand and the Philippines have depreciated between 10 percent and 35 percent respectively .
Explaining causes for the currency tumbles , economists said that if speculative attacks could be blamed for the spreading of the currency crisis in early July , loss of confidence in the region 's economic future is attributed to the continuous slide of regional currencies now .
In recent weeks , Southeast Asian nations tried to build confidence by cutting their current account deficits , which have amounted to over 5 percent of gross national product -LRB- GNP -RRB- in some countries and are considered one of the major causes of the current crisis .
In Malaysia , the government postponed the construction of the Bakun dam , an ambitious infrastructure project , with a price tag of 13.6 billion Ringgit -LRB- 4.6 billion US dollars -RRB- , and other large projects which need a lot of imports .
The Indonesia government also postponed the construction of power plants and toll roads worth of billions of dollars .
In the Philippines , President Fidel Ramos approved general proposals to discourage excessive private-sector investment , increase savings , improve banking regulations and reduce government spending .
In addition , Indonesia 's decision to seek IMF assistance last week is also seen as a confidence building step .
But analysts described these moves as first steps in a daunting journey to a currency market recovery .
At present , a dim outlook for the regional economy is continuing to undermine investors ' confidence .
High interest rates and weaker currencies are slowing the pace of economic growth in Southeast Asia .
The Philippine government on Friday scaled down its GNP growth target for this year from 7 to 8 percent to a range of 5 to 6 percent .
Other countries in the region , except Singapore , could hardly realize this year 's growth rates either , at least 1 or 2 percent lower than the original ones .
And next year 's growth will be much slower as these countries could feel the full negative impact of the crisis .
Nevertheless , cracks in the region 's banking sector made investors more worrisome .
In Thailand , where the government has closed 58 of 91 financial companies , Moody 's Investors Service Inc. says that as many as five of the country 's 15 commercial banks could fail by the end of 1998 because of bad debts .
In the Philippines , experts warned that the rising level of non-performing loans and declining earnings growth could cripple the country 's banks .
Economists said that a new wave of anxiety is washing over financial markets in Southeast Asia , and this one is not driven by worries over current-account deficit , but by fears about the health of the region 's banking systems .
Moreover , foreign investors are complaining about controls imposed recently by Southeast Asian governments on foreign exchange trading .
Last week , the Philippines re-imposed its volatility band for peso -- a stipulation that trading be suspended for 30 minutes if the peso falls more than 2 percent .
Earlier , Thailand , Malaysia and Indonesia also introduced various capital control measures , a move described by foreign investors as `` regulatory backlash against the foreign exchange market . ''
These measures could help stabilize the markets temporarily , but will undermine confidence of investors who will shift more funds to other places in the world .
Before confidence in Southeast Asia is fully restored in the months ahead , analysts said , turbulence in the region 's currency markets is still unavoidable .
