It is true that there are different views and perceptions with regard to the concept and meaning of economic security .
It is our preliminary thought that the primary essence of economic security is to safeguard the economic sovereignty of a state , of which financial security stands at the core .
Economic security is based , first of all , on formulating the right strategy for economic growth and enhancing a country 's economic might and competitiveness .
It is based on political stability , the inviolability of sovereignty , and respect for its model of development .
Meanwhile , it is necessary for countries to take an active part in and work to promote regional economic cooperation and coordination , readjust and improve the existing international economic and financial order and , in particular , to strengthen supervision over and take strict precautions against excessive speculation .
Economic security is mutual , and it is inadvisable to try to shift one 's troubles onto others .
Mr. Chairman , As the sole government-level channel for security dialogue in the Asia - Pacific region , the ARF is , under the new circumstances , playing an ever-greater role in enhancing mutual confidence among Asian - Pacific countries and promoting regional peace and stability .
For the past year , the ARF has made active exploration centering on confidence-building and achieved remarkable and concrete results .
The ARF spirit and approach have fostered , namely equal participation , consensus-making , seeking common ground while shelving differences and incremental progress .
This is attributable to the political commitments and active involvement of ARF participants and , more importantly , to the leadership and organization of ASEAN .
The Chinese side highly appreciates it and supports ASEAN in continuing to be the driving force .
At present , the ARF 's future direction has drawn much attention .
For reasons both past and present , it is still an arduous task to build confidence among Asia - Pacific nations .
Over the past five years , the ARF has accumulated some useful experience and formulated certain principles in the process of enhancing mutual understanding and confidence among its participants .
The Chinese Delegation holds that on the basis of summarizing those experience and principles , it is necessary to lay down the guiding principles for building confidence and conducting security dialogue and cooperation in the Asia - Pacific region .
At the same time , the ARF should continue to make timely exploration of the overlapping subject matters of confidence-building measures and preventive diplomacy as well as the ways and means of addressing them .
When conditions are ripe , we can probe the theories and approaches of preventive diplomacy which are suited to regional features .
We believe that under the guidance of correct principles , ARF 's dialogue and cooperation will be more fruitful .
Mr. Chairman , As a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council , China is committed to maintaining peace , stability , development and cooperation in the Asia - Pacific .
China has fulfilled its share of responsibility and obligation both in alleviating East Asia 's financial crisis and in easing up the tension in South Asia .
In the past year , China 's relations with the U.S. , Russia , Japan , ASEAN and the European Union have all grown stronger .
To seek converging points of common interests and to strengthen coordination and cooperation have become the main trend of various partnerships .
Not long ago , China , Kazakhstan , Kyrgyzstan , Russia and Tajikistan met and issued a joint statement , in which they undertake to adopt all necessary measures to ensure the strict implementation of the Shanghai agreement and the Moscow agreement reached by the five countries .
That gives expression to the development of a new type of security approach and is a fresh contribution to consolidating regional and global security and cooperation .
Following the publication of the white paper China : Arms Control and Disarmament in 1995 , China is going to issue a new white paper on national defense , a testimony to its firm commitment to maintaining regional peace and stability .
Proceeding from the overall interests of safeguarding regional peace and stability , China continues to persist in the settlement of disputes with its neighboring countries through friendly consultation and negotiation .
China will , as always , participate in the multi-tiered and multi-channeled dialogues and cooperation in the security field of the Asia - Pacific region .
China was , is and will be a staunch force in maintaining regional and global peace and stability and a positive factor promoting common development .
