BEIJING , July 29 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- China attaches great importance to developing its long-term and stable good-neighborly relations with members of ASEAN , the Association of Southeast Asian Nations , a senior Chinese military leader said today .
Chi Haotian , vice-chairman of China 's Central Military Commission , made the remarks in Beijing during talks with Philippine 's Secretary of Defense Renato de Villa .
The Chinese Government pays much attention to Villa 's visit and believes that it will serve to enhance mutual understanding between the two countries , and promote the growth of military relations , said Chi , who is also state councillor and defense minister .
Chi hoped that leaders of the two defense departments and armed forces would maintain frequent exchanges to push their friendship to a new high .
As a developing socialist country , Chi said , China has determined its national defense policy to be defensive for the sake of its social system and national security interests .
Chi explained that China pursues a positive defense strategy , and it will seek no hegemony or expansion , nor any form of military alliances with any other countries .
It will neither invade any country , nor station troops or establish military bases abroad .
The theory of a so-called `` China Threat '' is totally groundless , Chi said .
The theory spread by some Western countries claims , wrongly , that an economically prosperous China will pose a military threat to the rest of world .
The international situation is generally developing in the direction of relaxation , but the world is far from tranquil , said the Chinese minister , when briefing his Filipino counterpart on China 's view of the world situation .
The situation in the Asian - Pacific region , in contrast , is undergoing a sound development , he added .
Chi said that China , as a friendly neighbor of the Southeast Asian countries , sincerely hopes that peace and stability in Southeast Asia will be maintained , and cooperation and mutual development in the region be achieved .
Villa said that the Filipino Government attaches great importance to this significant visit to China , which is designated to establish closer ties between the defence offices and the armed forces of the two countries for the maintenance of regional peace and stability .
Villa also expressed his appreciation of China 's active participation in the ASEAN Regional Forum .
Prior to the talks , Chi presided over a welcoming ceremony in honor of Villa , who arrived in Beijing over the weekend for an official visit at Chi 's invitation .
