MOSCOW
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Alexander Sperin left his father 's birthday party early to help monitor the blastoff of the Soviets ' biggest space station , just before midnight Moscow time on Feb. 19 , 1986 .
They called it Mir , or `` peace , '' in a bit of Cold War irony .
Some dubbed it the beginning of a city in space .
But Sperin , now a deputy flight controller at Russian Mission Control , remembers wondering : Can this thing really last three years in orbit , as its designers claim ?
It could , and then some .
On Saturday , after 13 1/2 years , more than 77,000 loops around the Earth and 1,600 breakdowns , the Mir is scheduled to bid farewell to its final full-time crew .
It will then embark on a sad trajectory , a gradual descent that will see much of it sizzle in the Earth 's atmosphere and the rest -- ideally -- splash into the Pacific Ocean early next year .
The sad thing is n't the end of the Mir itself .
With age it 's become a 130-ton junk heap , a few salvageable scientific experiments lodged in a mass of corroding aluminum and outdated technology .
The sense of loss , for Russians , is that this lemon of a space station is the last major brainchild of the Soviet space program , and its demise caps decades of often unrivaled cosmic navigation .
Humbled by the collapse of their economy , military and global clout , Russians have clung to the Mir , blemishes and all .
They 're terrified of seeing their space accomplishments fade into history , too .
After Mir , Russia will concentrate its scarce space funds on the international space station , which is borrowing much from Mir 's experience but is unquestionably under U.S. command -- and is already far behind schedule because of financing delays on the Russian -made modules .
The Russians also hope to capitalize on their skill in making reliable , inexpensive rockets to send up foreign commercial satellites to sustain their space industry .
But nothing can replace Mir .
`` I do n't think we will devote ourselves as much to other projects , from the financial or the emotional point of view , '' Sperin said .
James Oberg , a Houston -based independent consultant and author of books on the Russian space program , agreed : `` They poured the Russian soul into the Mir , that capacity for incredible suffering and endurance . ''
The Mir lifted off from one of space travel 's holiest grounds : the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakstan , then a Soviet republic .
From Baikonur the Soviets sent up the world 's first satellite , the first man in space , the first woman in space .
The Mir was born just three weeks after the U.S. shuttle Challenger exploded , killing all seven passengers .
The Mir 's first cosmonauts carried pictures of the Challenger crew into orbit because they `` wanted those seven brave astronauts to go to outer space . ''
Later that year , Jane 's Spaceflight Directory wrote that the Soviet Union had taken an `` almost frightening '' 10-year lead over the United States in the space race .
The Mir was indeed untouchable for its first few years .
Then the country that conceived it started to unravel .
Shortages plagued the Soviet economy , and many citizens questioned generous space funding .
The station showed signs of wear .
Insulation was peeling off in chunks .
Electrical systems were spotty and its computers were capricious .
Twelve days before cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev was to come home from a four-month stint on Mir , Soviet hard-liners staged an unsuccessful coup in August 1991 that precipitated the union 's collapse .
Krikalev was left in orbit an extra six months amid the turmoil .
When he returned in March 1992 , his country no longer existed .
His hometown of Leningrad had become St. Petersburg .
His once-enviable salary left him below the poverty line .
`` There were those who said I should have stayed on the Mir , things were better up there , '' said Krikalev , who was the first Russian to fly on a NASA shuttle and is to be on the first crew of the international station .
Like just about every Russian , Krikalev is sad to see the Mir go .
`` It represents a lot for us .
But we must start a new era , '' he said .
Despite the Mir 's ailments , no other space program has come close to matching its duration , and its crews ' experience with long-term effects of weightlessness has been crucial in preparing the international station .
Endurance has been the Mir 's main -- some say its only -- major achievement .
Though it has been a laboratory for hundreds of scientific experiments , they have failed to bring the Russian people much benefit .
U.S. missions have been much more efficient at translating space research to commercial use .
Russians who work with the Mir smile sardonically when asked about its name , which Soviet officials said emphasized the peaceful nature of their space program .
In fact , Russian and foreign observers now say the Soviets hoped -- and the Americans feared -- the Mir would have significant military uses .
But Oberg said that after some initial developments , such as advanced sensors and ground observation , those plans largely fizzled .
Politics , combined with the humiliating failure of other recent Russian space projects , helped keep the Mir aloft .
No Russian leader wanted to be associated with the end of the Mir .
The momentum for bringing it down mounted in 1997 , a year that saw a fire rage on the Mir in February and a near-fatal collision with a cargo ship in June that punctured the station -- the worst-ever space wreck .
Since NASA completed a program that put seven astronauts aboard the Mir , the United States has been pressing Russia to abandon it in favor of the international station .
The new station 's first two pieces are in orbit and a crucial Russian -built segment that will house the crew is scheduled for liftoff in November .
Some Mir specialists -- who earn about 5,000 rubles a month , or $ 200 -- will move to a backup control room for the international station .
Others will be laid off .
Yet the Mir is n't dead yet .
And some Russian space officials are still hoping for a new injection of cash to send another crew .
But Sperin , a 30-year veteran of the space program , warns that once the Mir starts lowering its orbit toward the Earth after the current crew leaves , it would be fruitless and possibly dangerous to try to reverse the process .
`` We need to say goodbye . ''
