MOSCOW
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
After years of cosmic misfortune , could there actually be a flash of good news coming from Russia 's sputtering space program ?
On Friday , Russia plans to launch the first leg of the biggest space project ever -- the International Space Station , which is designed to serve as man 's home away from the home planet for the next two decades .
The new station should be a godsend for the impoverished Russians , masters of long-term space flight .
Russia gets to play a central role in the premier manned space venture at the dawn of the 21st century , while most of the money comes from the 15 other participating nations -- the United States , Canada , Japan and 12 European states .
Yet Russia 's beleaguered space professionals , who have endured deep funding cuts , failed rocket launches and several near disasters on the Mir , ca n't seem to shake that hangdog look .
They remain hopelessly enthralled with the Mir , that smelly , leaky , fire-singed bucket-of-bolts that has made 70,000 loops around the Earth over the past 12 years .
And when the new station goes up , their venerated Mir is supposed to come down .
`` There was euphoria when the Mir was launched , '' said Viktor Blagov , the deputy flight controller at Russia 's Mission Control ever since the Mir was sent up in 1986 .
`` We do n't have that same feeling now .
Nobody in Russia wants to see the Mir de-orbited . ''
Russia can no longer afford a space station , let alone two .
And NASA says the price for participating in the new station is to discard the Mir , which is supposed to vanish into the Pacific Ocean around the middle of next year if all goes as planned .
Plans are n't etched in stone , however .
An aide to President Boris Yeltsin , Yevgeny Shaposhnikov , raised the possibility on Sunday that the Mir might stay in orbit until the end of 1999 or early in 2000 , possibility even longer .
The Russians insist they are fully committed to the deal .
But the new station can only replace the Mir in orbit , not in their hearts .
`` The Mir is old , but it could stay up for five more years , '' said cosmonaut Anatoly Solovyov , who must surely know as much about the station as anyone .
A veteran of five Mir missions , his most recent sojourn ended in February after he performed several spacewalks to patch up some of the station 's most serious problems .
Russia 's emotional attachment to the Mir may seem odd to outsiders , who consider it the orbital equivalent of a rusting jalopy .
But through Russian eyes , the Mir has been an unequaled success .
Expected to last just five years , it has demonstrated the feasibility of long-term human habitation in space , taught crews how to improvise during extended journeys , and served as the model for many aspects of the new space station .
When the Mir is gone , the Russians will be without a major space project of their own for the first time in decades .
And playing second fiddle to the Americans wo n't come easy to a country that put the first satellite in orbit and the first man in space .
For both Americans and Russians , this transition from the space race to a celestial embrace requires all sorts of compromises their space agencies have never had to make before .
The Mir and the U.S. space shuttle have both handled international crews , and while these efforts were successes , they also highlighted national differences over what is safe and what is n't .
When the Mir suffered a string of accidents last year , the Americans expressed skepticism about its safety and debated the wisdom of sending up another astronaut .
The Russians , meanwhile , noted the Mir had been afflicted by more than 1,500 breakdowns during its lifetime and said the latest problems , like earlier ones , could be fixed without endangering the crew .
No single country will be completely in charge of the new station , making it a mini- United Nations in orbit that will require equal measures of diplomacy in space and on the ground .
A few examples : _The cash-strapped Russians have repeatedly missed deadlines on building the key service module , which will house the first crew .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Washington keeps putting up extra money , but some U.S. congressmen are agitated over Russia 's poky pace , which has put the space station a year behind schedule .</ENAMEX>
_The Russians have the most experienced space fliers , but less experienced Americans will command the crews .
The Russians have agreed , reluctantly .
_There will be two mission control centers -- the main one in Houston , a backup in Moscow .
But the Russians have been pushing for more control over their equipment and their cosmonauts .
The new station is essentially a bigger , better Mir , but it wo n't be crossing any space frontiers .
Like Mir , it will endlessly circle the Earth , and critics joke that its mission is to boldly go where man has gone so many times before .
Friday 's liftoff from Baikonur in the former Soviet republic of Kazakstan will send up an unmanned propulsion component .
The space shuttle Endeavor is to carry the Americans ' first segment -- a connecting passageway -- into space Dec. 3 .
The first crews wo n't board the station until 2000 , after Russia 's behind-schedule service module is in place .
Some think ...
PICKUP 27th graf .
