MOSCOW
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">The only way Russia can commit its scarce resources to the new international space station and keep its aging Mir station in orbit is if it finds new funding sources , the nation 's space chief said Wednesday .</ENAMEX>
Next year 's draft budget now under review in the Russian parliament earmarks a meager 3 billion rubles -LRB- dlrs 143 million -RRB- for space research , Russian Space Agency director Yuri Koptev said at a news conference .
`` The amount is clearly inadequate and is likely to further shrink because of inflation , '' he said .
Koptev has said that Russia will have to spend about dlrs 270 million next year to provide a long-delayed key module for the new international station , along with two cargo ships .
Russia is dealing with its worst economic crisis since the Soviet collapse .
The first two elements of the dlrs 40 billion , 16-nation station are already in orbit .
The Russian -built Zarya module was successfully launched last month , and the crew of the U.S. space shuttle Endeavour linked it with the American -made Unity connecting chamber earlier this month .
The Endeavour returned to Earth late Tuesday .
Koptev said Russia will raise additional funds by selling more hardware to NASA .
He said he had already held preliminary talks with NASA officials on selling an escape capsule for the new station and hoped to sign the contract early next year .
Russia has failed to meet two target dates for construction of the station 's crew compartment , putting the whole project more than a year behind schedule .
Struggling to prevent further delays , Russia has already sold its early research time on the station to NASA for dlrs 60 million .
The crew module is now set to blast off next summer , and the new station will not be inhabitable until at least early 2000 .
Koptev stressed that Russia 's partners would n't tolerate further delays .
`` Every year of delay costs Americans dlrs 2 billion , and hundreds of millions dollars for the Europeans , '' Koptev said .
Koptev reiterated that officials still hope to keep the Mir space station in orbit past the current target date of the middle of next year , but that would only happen if extra money is found .
`` The current amount of financing does n't allow that , '' he said .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Space officials have promised to decide on Mir 's fate this month , but Koptev said the decision is likely to be announced early next year .</ENAMEX>
Under the current plan , Russians are to send a joint crew of Russian , French and Slovak astronauts to Mir next February .
Two Russians are then expected to stay on the Mir to gradually lower its orbit to prepare for sinking the 120-ton station in the ocean .
-LRB- vi/adc -RRB-
