CAPE CANAVERAL , Fla .
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
With space station construction about to start , NASA is considering a trip back to Mir to salvage science equipment that could be used on the new outpost .
U.S. and Russian space officials said Tuesday that the discussions for a possible shuttle flight to the aging Mir next year are `` very tentative . ''
`` We 're still discussing what hardware might be recoverable or what might make sense vs. the cost of the shuttle , '' said Frank Culbertson , deputy program manager for the international space station .
`` It 's just a matter of assessing what the risks , costs and benefits are . ''
Culbertson said it would take six months or so to plan such a mission , making it late spring or early summer before a shuttle could fly to the Russian station .
A shuttle flight typically costs about $ 500 million .
The Russians requested a 10th shuttle ferry flight because of a lack of funding .
They launched the first part of the international space station on Nov. 20 ; the power and propulsion tug was built in Russia but financed by the United States .
Space shuttle Endeavour is scheduled to blast off Thursday with an American -made chamber that the six-person crew will connect to the Russian tug .
Unacceptable weather is forecast , though , for the 3 : 57 a.m. launch .
The third compartment , a Russian control module , is stalled until next summer because of the country 's financial crisis .
Astronauts and cosmonauts cannot move in until it 's in place .
Valery Ryumin , a Russian station official who flew to Mir in June on what was considered to be the last shuttle visit , said money is a problem and more is needed .
`` We have to admit that we do n't have a surplus of the science equipment , '' he said .
Unable to afford two space stations , the Russian Space Agency has targeted next summer for Mir 's demise , though some in the country would like to keep the nearly 13-year -old station up much longer .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Discussions are under way with an unnamed company , in fact , to provide an alternative source of funding</ENAMEX> .
Russian officials would not elaborate Tuesday on the possible deals .
`` When it is time to get rid of a pair of old shoes , you never do that before you buy a new pair of shoes -- especially in the wintertime , '' Ryumin said .
`` So why get rid of an old space station when we do n't have a new one ? ''
