MOSCOW
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Russian Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov signed a decree today to keep the Mir space station in orbit for three more years , officials said .
The move is almost certain to disappoint U.S. space officials , who want Russia to abandon the Mir in coming months so Moscow can spend its limited resources on building the new International Space Station .
Primakov 's decree was announced by the government press service .
No additional details were immediately available .
The Mir has been in orbit for almost 13 years , far longer than any other space station .
It suffered several serious breakdowns in 1997 , but has been running smoothly for more than a year now .
Russian space officials are deeply attached to the Mir and have repeatedly said that it can continue to house human visitors for several years to come .
However , Russia is chronically short of cash , and critics say it ca n't afford to fund two separate space stations .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The United States and other countries have paid the Russians hundreds of millions of dollars in recent years to rent space for their astronauts on the Mir .</ENAMEX>
The money has helped keep the Russian space program going .
The new International Space Station includes 16 nations , led by the United States and Russia .
The first two parts were launched in November and December , though no people are expected to start living on the station for about one more year .
The project is already more than a year behind schedule , due to large part to Russian delays in constructing a key module .
U.S. space officials fear there will be additional delays -- and additional costs to U.S. taxpayers -- if the Russians do not abandon the Mir and focus on the new space station .
Russian cosmonaut Viktor Afanasyev , French astronaut Jean - Pierre Heignere and Slovak Ivan Bella , meanwhile , are scheduled to blast off to the Mir on Feb. 20 atop a Soyuz rocket from the Baikonur cosmodrome in the former Soviet republic of Kazakstan .
After a 10-day stint on Mir , Bella will return to Earth with Mir 's current commander Gennady Padalka .
Padalka 's crewmate Sergei Avdeyev will stay aboard with Afanasyev and Heignere through the summer , until a scheduled Aug. 21 return .
