MOSCOW
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- The long-delayed International Space Station has been postponed once again due to flaws in a booster rocket , while Russia 's Mir space station may get a new lease on life , space officials said Tuesday .
The launch of the crucial crew compartment for the multibillion-dollar , 16-nation space station has been long behind schedule because of the Russian government 's failure to provide funds for its manufacture .
Then , when the module was almost ready , two crashes of Proton booster rockets pushed officials to postpone the launch date again Tuesday .
The Zvezda -LRB- Star -RRB- module is to be carried into space by a Proton .
Sergei Gromov , spokesman for the Energia company that built the module , said the crashes were caused by a manufacturing flaw in the rockets ' second-stage engines .
The Voronezh Mechanical Works , which built the engines , promised to replace them by the end of June , he told The Associated Press .
`` Once the booster is ready , it takes about 45 days to prepare the module for launch , so the earliest launch time is the end of August , '' he said .
He said the actual launch date would be pushed back even further because space officials first want to launch refurbished Protons with less-precious cargos .
Gromov 's statement means that the entire project likely will be thrown more than two years behind schedule .
The station 's first components were launched into space in November and December 1998 , but the first permanent crew may only begin its stint on the station after the crew module is put into orbit .
A new launch date will be discussed next month , Gromov said .
He said that some software problems with Zvezda 's computers also must be resolved before the launch .
`` Obviously , the Americans are not pleased with the delay , but they react with understanding , '' he said .
Two Proton rockets crashed shortly after launch July 5 and Oct. 27 .
The official investigation released by the Interfax news agency Tuesday said the engines caught fire because they were contaminated by metal and mineral particles .
While the new international station faced new delays , Russia 's own Mir space station may remain in orbit for longer than earlier planned , officials said .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">The government decided last year to discard the aging station if private investors fail to come up with funds to keep it aloft .</ENAMEX>
The station has been orbiting the Earth unmanned after its last crew left in August , and it was expected that one final crew would go to the Mir to send it down around March .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">No major funds have been found</ENAMEX> , but Gromov said Tuesday that a two-man crew is now set to blast off for the station March 30 .
Their mission would last for at least 45 days .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Gromov said the state-controlled Energia , which built the Mir and has been running it since its launch in February 1986 , is looking to a U.S. company named Golden Apple to save Mir .</ENAMEX>
He declined to provide more details .
If the U.S. firm backs off , <ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Energia still hopes the government will change its mind and pour more resources into Mir </ENAMEX>, the last remaining symbol of once-glorious Soviet space program .
