MOSCOW
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- After eight months of orbiting Earth unoccupied , the Mir is about to have some new tenants -- two cosmonauts who blasted off Tuesday on a mission to bring the troubled space station back to life .
Sergei Zalyotin and Alexander Kaleri were shot into the sky aboard a Soyuz rocket from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakstan , said Vera Medvedkova , a spokeswoman with the Russian space agency .
Anticipation is high over the two-month mission because it comes after months of doubt about whether the 14-year -old Mir , the pride of the Russian space program , would remain in orbit or be forced down in a fiery plunge into the ocean .
`` Like athletes before a start , we are feeling excitement and a desire to get on the track as soon as possible , '' Zalyotin said on Russia 's RTR television Monday .
The Mir 's last residents left in August , as the cash-strapped Russian space program decided that keeping the 130-ton station aloft did n't make economic sense .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">However , the Mir was n't taken out of operation immediately , giving officials time to search for funding .</ENAMEX>
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Colorful proposals came and went , including a plan to send an actor to the Mir to film scenes for a movie about a renegade cosmonaut .
The government had planned to decommission the Mir around the end of March , but changed its plans after MirCorp , based in Amsterdam , The Netherlands , agreed to pay $ 10 million to $ 20 million to lease commercial rights on the station .
MirCorp has said it is considering various ventures aboard the Mir , including opening it for well-heeled tourists .</ENAMEX>
Under the agreement , Mir remains Russian -owned and available for Russian scientific use .
The station has been plagued by a series of glitches , but officials insist it 's in good shape and safe .
`` Mir 's computer-controlled orientation system that keeps it properly aligned with the sun has been successfully activated on commands from the ground last month and it 's fully ready for an automatic docking , '' Mission Control spokesman Valery Lyndin said Monday .
Once hooked up with the station , the crew will concentrate on efforts to stop an air leak from the station .
Shortly before the last crew left , officials noticed that the station was slowly losing oxygen , but said the leak was minor and easy to compensate .
An unmanned cargo ship that docked with the station in February brought oxygen and other supplies , and the cabin pressure has been brought to normal , Lyndin said .
He added that new equipment has been made to search for the leak .
During the mission , the crew is also expected to go on a spacewalk to conduct scientific experiments .
Russian actor Vladimir Steklov -- the would-be `` renegade cosmonaut '' -- was supposed to travel to Mir along with the crew to make a movie .
But space officials canceled his flight after the filmmakers failed to fund the trip .
The mission had been originally set to last for 45 days , but officials extended it to 60 days after the cancellation of Steklov 's mission left more food and water for the crew .
-- On the Net : Russian space agency site : http : //www.rka.ru/
