WASHINGTON --
Launching of the next section of the International Space Station , a Russian -made module with laboratory and crew space , will be delayed until at least September because of technical problems with the component , NASA officials said Friday .
The often-delayed service module , a crucial component of the space station , was to have been transported into space in July , to be joined to the initial two sections already in orbit .
But its launching will be pushed back at least two months .
The Russian effort has been repeatedly delayed by money troubles , but officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration attributed this delay to the need for further ground testing and to problems with computer software for the unit .
`` It 's a development program and they are having some technical problems that have to be worked out , '' NASA 's deputy associate administrator for space development , Gretchen McClain , said in an interview .
`` I do n't think we will see it before September . ''
No new launching date for the Russian module has been set , and official announcement of the delay will await review meetings to be held over the next two months among NASA , the Russian Space Agency and other partners in the project .
Sixteen nations , led by the United States and Russia , are involved in building the space station , which is expected to take five years to complete at a cost ranging from $ 40 billion to $ 60 billion .
The project requires connecting more than 100 major components , carried into space on 45 space-shuttle and rocket flights and assembled in 162 planned space walks .
Construction of the space station is more than a year and a half behind schedule , primarily because cash-strapped Russia has not had enough money to finish the critical service module .
Last fall , NASA agreed to provide Russia with $ 60 million in exchange for future services aboard the station to help in completing the service module , which will provide living quarters and research space in the early stages of the space station 's occupation .
Ms. McClain said the Russian Space Agency had distributed the added funds by the end of last year , paying off subcontractors and getting work on the module going again .
`` The problems they are having now are technical , not financial , '' she said .
But Ms. McClain added that the Russian government still must come up with money for its space program 's budget this year , including continuing work on the space station .
The first two segments of the station were launched last fall and joined 240 miles above Earth on Dec. 6 by a crew aboard the space shuttle Endeavour .
The station now consists of a Russian -made power and maneuvering module and an American -made node to be used to connect future segments .
Another shuttle flight to the station , carrying equipment and supplies to outfit the existing modules , is tentatively scheduled for May .
The delay will mean more problems for NASA 's shuttle-launching schedule , which has been disrupted by delays in the space station and other programs .
The scheduled launching of the Chandra X -ray Observatory aboard the space shuttle Columbia in April was pushed into May last week because of problems with that spacecraft .
Moreover , a supply flight by the shuttle Atlantis to the space station in August , which was to follow the attachment of the service module , will have to be delayed until the Russian service module is launched .
Space agency officials said they had been assured by their Russian counterparts of their commitment to the space station .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Even though the Russian government last week approved a plan to extend the life of its Mir space station if private investment could be found , Russian officials said their priority was the international program .</ENAMEX>
The Russians had previously agreed to bring the Mir down this summer and concentrate its resources on the international project .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Ms. McClain said NASA was following the Mir developments closely to be sure there would be no effect on the international station if private investment could be found to keep the Russian station in space .</ENAMEX>
James Oberg of Houston , a former NASA engineer who is an expert on the Russian space program , said the newest delay with the service module was not unexpected and would probably not be the last .
The Russians still face huge financial problems that will prevent them from keeping their commitments as a major partner in the international space station program , he said Friday , and NASA 's leadership refuses to acknowledge the depth of the problems .
`` After every delay , we are assured by our people in NASA that we are on top of the problem , '' Oberg said .
`` And that 's never been the case . ''
