WASHINGTON --
Astronauts report that one of the most striking visions in space is approaching the Russian Mir space station , which first appears as a distant point of light .
Drawing closer , Mir -- with its cruciform configuration of modules and arrays of wing-like solar panels -- slowly begins to resemble a giant cosmic insect glowing bright against the blackness of space .
Now , visits to this celestial dragonfly by U.S. space shuttle crews are about to end .
After being a focus of U.S. manned space activity for the last three years , stays on Mir are about to join Gemini capsules and Saturn rockets as historical artifacts of the nation 's space program .
The shuttle Discovery is scheduled to dock with Mir this week and retrieve Andrew Thomas , a U.S. astronaut who has spent four months conducting research on the Russian outpost .
But unlike in a half-dozen previous missions , the shuttle will not be carrying a replacement astronaut .
NASA plans to launch the Discovery Tuesday at 6 : 10 p.m. with a six-member crew .
During the next 10 days , the shuttle crew is to rendezvous and dock with Mir , transfer more than a ton of supplies to the station while retrieving a like amount of scientific experiments and equipment , and bring Thomas back home .
Thomas , a mechanical engineer , is the last of seven Americans to live and work on Mir during the past three years .
The shuttle- Mir program , which began in 1994 with Russian astronauts ' joining the crews on shuttle missions and a shuttle flying around the Russian station , was billed as the first phase of a program leading to building the planned international space station .
At the conclusion of Thomas ' flight , NASA officials say , U.S. astronauts will have spent a total of 31 months on Mir , including a continuous stretch of 27 months that began in March 1996 .
This total of 962 crew days in orbit is more than Americans have accumulated in 17 years of flying space shuttles on missions that typically last less than two weeks , NASA officials say .
Frank Culbertson Jr. , an astronaut who directs the shuttle- Mir program for NASA , says the program provided not only experience in long-duration space flight and research , but also invaluable lessons on how to run a multinational space station .
In addition to dealing with language and cultural differences , he said , the experience contributed to crucial design changes in the future space station and a better understanding of how to handle crises .
`` It 's hard to imagine beginning the international space station without what we 've learned from shuttle- Mir , '' Culbertson said in an interview , `` We learned that there was a lot we did n't know .
We learned from the problems that occurred and we learned a lot from the Russians about how to run a space station . ''
`` The goals were to get engineering and operational experience , and that 's what we got , '' Culbertson said of the program , which he said cost about $ 370 million , not counting shuttle flights to and from Mir .
The program was part of a $ 400 million , four-year agreement signed by NASA in 1994 to compensate Russia for seven shuttle- Mir docking missions for research and for financing a $ 100 million module for the proposed international station .
In 1996 , NASA extended the program by adding $ 73 million for two additional flights .
The international space station is to be a giant research outpost assembled in sections above Earth over a five-year period .
The project , estimated to cost more than $ 40 billion , is sponsored by a partnership of 16 nations , including the United States , Russia , Japan , Canada and members of the European Space Agency .
Construction of the station is tentatively set to begin this fall , more than a year behind schedule .
The delay has mainly been caused by failure of the Russian Space Agency to get sufficient money to complete a critical module that is to be the third piece of the station .
Dr. Norman Thagard , a former astronaut who was the first American to stay aboard Mir , said the cooperative program was worth doing , despite some rough spots .
Thagard , a physician and engineer , was the only American to fly to Mir with his crewmates aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft instead of an American craft .
`` It cost us very little to look over Russian shoulders and learn how to -- and not how to in some cases -- run a space station , '' said Thagard , who spent 115 days aboard Mir starting on March 14 , 1995 .
`` You would think that some astute engineers could think things through and come up with everything you would need for a good space station , '' he said .
`` But there is no substitute for being there and doing it to learn how to do something right . ''
While officials of the NASA and outside experts generally agree that the shuttle- Mir program was valuable for both nations , it has been a source of controversy from the beginning .
Some critics saw it as mainly a foreign aid program , a way for the United States to subsidize a faltering Russian space program that has been short of cash since the breakup of the Soviet Union .
The effort was designed , they say , to keep unemployed Russian engineers and scientists from exporting rocket and weapons technology to make a living .
The program came under increasing criticism last year after the aging Mir , designed for a five-year life but now in its 12th year of operation , suffered a series of problems and near-disasters that threatened the safety of the Russian and U.S. astronauts aboard .
In February , a fire broke out in a Mir module when a solid-fuel oxygen generator burned out of control for almost 14 minutes .
The crew , including the American astronaut Jerry Linenger , found that the fire extinguishers aboard could not put out the blaze , which blocked the route to the Soyuz escape capsule .
The extinguishers did manage to cool the walls until the flame died out .
In June , while the crew was testing a new system for docking Progress supply ships to Mir , a cargo vessel crashed into Mir , damaging some solar power panels and cracking the hull of the station 's Spektr science module .
As air leaked out of the station , the crew , including an American , Michael Foale , prepared to escape in the Soyuz vessel but was able instead to seal off Spektr and restore pressure in the rest of the station .
In addition to these mishaps , Mir 's control computers began breaking down , setting the station adrift several times , and cracked pipes leaked toxic coolant into the station .
Concerned about Mir 's deteriorating condition and crew safety , members of Congress , including the House Science Committee , demanded that NASA certify Mir 's safety before committing any more Americans to long-term visits .
In September 1997 , NASA 's inspector general , Roberta Gross , released a report requested by the committee on Mir safety .
In the report and subsequent testimony , Ms. Gross listed numerous safety concerns and questioned whether the agency was getting objective analysis from the various groups it had asked to assess safety .
In a series of letters to agency officials , Col. Blaine Hammond , a former shuttle pilot and the top safety official in the astronaut office , called the Mir -shuttle program `` a disaster waiting to happen . ''
Several powerful members of Congress , including space program supporters like as Rep. James Sensenbrenner , R - Wis. , who heads the science committee , said the United States had learned enough from having five astronauts stay aboard Mir for periods of four months or longer and that the last two visits should be canceled .
The critics told Daniel Goldin , the administrator of the space agency , that if he allowed any more Americans to stay aboard Mir , he would be held personally responsible if anything went wrong .
Three days before the shuttle Atlantis took off for Mir last Sept. 25 , Goldin , saying that two safety committees concurred , approved a four-month stay aboard Mir for the astronaut David Wolf .
Because of numerous repairs to Mir systems and the absence of any major accidents , the stays of Wolf and Thomas , who replaced him aboard the station , proved largely uneventful .
`` The concerns were reasonably well grounded , '' said Dr. John Logsdon , director of George Washington University 's Space Policy Institute .
`` It was no picnic up there and probably more dangerous than we would have liked . ''
Logsdon said the shuttle- Mir program produced valuable information and experience for NASA at a bargain price , but it was time to end it and start building the next space station .
`` There is both a sense of gratification and relief that we have gotten through it without any of the really bad things happening , '' he said .
The space agency says the shuttle- Mir experience resulted in a long list of enhancements and modifications of the international space station and its planned operations .
For instance , managers refined procedures for running the station from control centers in the United States and Russia , where flight officers speak different languages .
One result was a better system of notifying partners of emergencies , Culbertson said .
`` When the fire on Mir occurred , it took 12 hours before we were notified of it , '' he said .
But after the collision , Culbertson said , he was on the telephone with Russian controllers as the astronauts were sealing the hatches .
Other space station changes resulting from the shuttle- Mir program include these : -- Addition of more lights and sensors to help in rendezvous and docking with the station .
-- Demonstration of a wireless communications system that will reduce the number of data cables needed throughout the station , saving millions of dollars .
-- Changes in computer programs , equipment and procedures to allow simple , single-command shutdown of ventilation systems to prevent fire from spreading , and improved fire extinguishers .
-- Enhanced emergency procedures , including quick disconnect cables , in case of depressurization .
-- Rerouting of cooling lines and electrical cables to prevent moisture condensation , and adding a protective coating to coolant lines to prevent corrosion and leaks .
-- Changes in how fluids are vented from the space station , based on studies in the vicinity of Mir of contamination from the purging of fluids and waste .
-- Improved psychological support of crew members , including enhanced electronic mail and news , better video and audio conferences with family members , and routine delivery of CD - ROMs containing mission-related information and recreational material .
-- Better countermeasures to minimize the physical effects of weightlessness , including using Russian methods of zeroing in on specific muscles , like those in the neck , for exercise .
-- Modified scheduling to give astronauts more flexibility in completing daily tasks .
`` NASA is expert at flying 10- to 14-day shuttle missions , but operating a space station is very different , '' said Jim Van Laak , deputy director of the shuttle- Mir program , `` It was n't until we began operating on Mir that we began to appreciate the subtleties of this .
It was quite a learning experience . ''
Some experts , however , questioned how much the lessons of the shuttle- Mir program would apply to the new space station .
James Oberg , a Houston -based consultant on the Russian space program , said NASA might be overstating the benefits gained from the program .
Mir and its systems are so different from the international space station that some of the things learned are irrelevant , he said .
`` We learned some critical things , such as how to work with the Russians to jointly control a space station and the effects of long-term flight on people , but we did n't need Mir to teach us to address some safety issues more seriously , '' Oberg said .
`` Most of what was learned was obvious or could have been learned in simulations .
To brag about how much we learned on Mir is to brag about how little we knew about space stations before we started building one . ''
With the end of the shuttle- Mir program , questions remain on the immediate fate of Mir .
Until recently , the Russians planned to keep Mir in orbit until December 1999 , when the first elements of the international space station are to be operational and routinely occupied .
But the United States has pushed for Russia to stop supporting Mir earlier , perhaps as early as the spring of 1999 , to free up the limited supply of Progress supply ships and manned Soyuz capsules in support of the new station .
Last week , Yuri Koptev , head of the Russian space agency , said his nation 's desperate cash shortage might force it to abandon Mir a year earlier than planned and bring the station down as early as this fall .
Using a series of rocket firings from attached Progress ships , Russian astronauts plan to gradually lower Mir 's orbit to an altitude of 120 miles from 250 miles .
Several weeks after the final crew leaves Mir , Russian ground controllers will guide Mir into Earth 's atmosphere with a series of rocket firings .
Whatever the timetable , Mir is to end its life after a fiery descent into the atmosphere , where most of it is to burn up and heavier pieces of debris are to fall into the ocean , probably the South Pacific .
