MOSCOW --
With no fanfare and much regret , Russia abandoned the Mir space station early Saturday as its three-man crew departed the battered , 13-year -old complex in preparation for its fiery tumble from orbit early next year .
The completion of Mir 's final scientific mission marks the end of a bittersweet era of Soviet and Russia space exploration that began with the triumphal launch of the world 's first satellite , Sputnik , in 1957 , and the first man in space , Yuri Gagarin , in 1961 .
With the Cold War over and the Soviet Union gone , Russia can no longer afford a dominant role in space .
It lacks the money to keep its hobbling space station aloft while also participating in the new International Space Station being led by the United States .
Mir , launched in 1986 , became mankind 's first permanently inhabited space station and was not expected to operate much longer than five years .
But with Russia 's status in the world steadily eroding over the decade , Mir -- which means `` peace '' and `` world '' in Russian -- became an important symbol of the nation 's scientific competence and staying power .
With ingenuity , luck and millions of dollars in U.S. and European assistance , Mir remained in orbit .
`` We are leaving with a bitter heart , we are leaving a little piece of Russia , '' senior cosmonaut Viktor Afanasyev said , before he and his two crewmates floated from Mir into their space capsule for their return to Earth .
Another crew will visit Mir next February or March , but only to prepare it for its crash into Earth .
Parts of the station will burn up in the atmosphere , while the larger modules will splash into the Pacific Ocean .
Cosmonauts Afanasyev and Sergei Avdeyev and Frenchman Jean - Pierre Heignere closed the docking hatches connecting Mir with their Soyuz - TM spacecraft and detached from the station after 1 a.m. -LRB- local time -RRB- on Saturday -LRB- 5 p.m. Friday EDT -RRB- .
They are to land three hours later in a deserted plain in the former Soviet republic of Kazakhstan .
Saturday will be the first day since 1989 that humans have not occupied Mir , which has made more than 77,000 orbits of earth and was a laboratory for some 17,000 scientific experiments .
In later years , Russia shared Mir -- and its many problems -- with other nations , including the United States , which sent seven astronauts aboard between 1995 and June 1998 .
The station was plagued by fires , breakdowns and computer failures , including a 1997 collision with an unmanned cargo ship that nearly ended in disaster .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Russia 's cash-starved government tried desperately to find a way to keep Mir alive .
It put the station up for sale and even considered a $ 100 million offer from a British businessman , which in the end turned out to be bogus .
Eventually , Russian space officials concluded that Mir -- costing between $ 150 million and $ 250 million a year to operate -- must die .</ENAMEX>
The head of the Russian Space Agency said recently that sending further missions to Mir would be like playing `` Russian roulette in space . ''
In about a week , Mission Control in Korolyov will transmit the final radio command to shut down the main computer aboard Mir and the guidance system maintaining the station 's attitude in orbit .
Systems will continue to keep the craft heated , but otherwise Mir , weighing 130 tons , becomes the world 's largest hunk of space junk .
American astronaut Shannon Lucid , who spent 188 days aboard the station , compared the passing of Mir to the sentimental selling of an old and dear home .
`` You 've really enjoyed living in the house and maybe your kids were born there .
But then there comes a point when you need those extra bedroom and you need to move , '' she told reporters in America .
During its life , Mir became post- Soviet Russia 's greatest status symbol and , in later years as its problems multiplied , its most embarrassing joke .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">It developed a cult following -- groups are now taking up collections to try and keep in aloft</ENAMEX> -- and became the punchline of Tonight Show host Jay Leno 's monologues .
But space experts agree that Mir gave the world its first sustained practice at long-endurance space flight , valuable experience as the 16-nation International Space Station , now being assembled , takes shape and talk continues of a possible mission to Mars sometime in the next century .
`` It is experience that nobody else in this world has , '' said Alain Fournier - Sicre , director of the Moscow office of the European Space Agency .
A small , grassroots movement to save Mir held a rally in Moscow last month and attempted to garner collections to save the station , with little signs of progress .
In America , the New York -based Space Frontier Foundation , an interest group dedicated to promoting space exploration , has begun a `` Keep Mir Alive '' campaign and is soliciting donations .
However , Russian space officials say they see little that could change in the next six months to prevent Mir 's end .
`` It is better to bring the Mir down on the bed of the Pacific Ocean with honor rather than prolong its service life until serious troubles occur that will mar its place in history as a unique example of Russian space engineering , '' said Yuri Koptev , general director of the Russian space agency .
ENDIT
