BAIKONUR , Kazakhstan --
Bearing a Pizza Hut logo and the hopes of an ambitious project to assemble a giant laboratory in space , a huge Proton - K rocket Wednesday boosted into orbit the long-delayed module that will house astronauts working in the International Space Station .
The successful launch , which followed two years of delays and sometimes bitter recrimination between Moscow and Washington , means that the $ 60 billion space station can be occupied by Russian and American astronauts as early as this fall , NASA officials said .
It also gave a much-needed boost to Russia 's storied but now-beleaguered space program .
In a burst of yellow flame and brown smoke , the 22-ton Russian -made rocket boosted the 26-ton Zvezda life-support module into orbit through clear blue skies .
A deafening roar echoed over the arid steppe at the Baikonur Launch Facility in the former Soviet republic of Kazakhstan .
Hundreds of spectators , standing about two miles from the launch pad , cheered wildly as the ground rumbled beneath their feet .
`` We 're off to the races , '' said Jeff Worley , an engineer with Boeing who has worked on the International Space Station for seven years .
The $ 320 million Zvezda -- it means `` star '' in Russian -- is tentatively scheduled to dock with the first two modules of the space station on July 26 under computer guidance .
Those modules , which have been in space since 1998 , are the Russian -built Zarya -LRB- `` dawn '' in Russian -RRB- and the US -made Unity .
It will take about 35 more launches before the space station is complete in 2005 .
The launch , originally scheduled for April 1998 , was delayed six times over the past two years as the cash-strapped Russian space program struggled to come up with funds to complete the module .
As a result , some US officials began to question the wisdom of working with the Russians , who often appeared unable to pull their own weight on the 16-nation project .
To help defray the costs , Russia agreed to display the logo of US -based Pizza Hut fast-food chain for a reported payment of $ 1 million .
`` We do n't worry about skeptics , said an elated National Aeronautics and Space Administration chief Daniel Goldin , standing on the steps of the viewing platform after the launch .
`` We know where we are going . ''
Goldin said he had confidence in Russia 's ability to contribute to the space station .
`` The Russians have gone through all sorts of difficulty with their economy , the political changes , and a whole variety of other problems , and they came through and did what they said they were going to do , '' he said .
`` I have to say that this is one of the happiest and proudest days of my life . ''
Goldin said the US has put up $ 35 billion in development funds for the space station , while Japan and Europe combined providef $ 9 billion .
Nobody could provide figures for the Russians .
He warned , however , that a lot of work remains to be done .
`` This is tough work .
We are n't going to Disneyland , We are going to space , '' he said .
`` Before we pop the champagne corks , we have two more weeks before we dock , but I have a sense everything will be OK . ''
Yury Koptev , director of the Russian Space Agency , said the launch had decided `` whether Russia 's space program will go on existing or not . ''
`` We have traveled a very long and difficult road .
We wish the road had been a highway , but a highway it was not .
It was often closed for repairs , and we experienced detours , '' Koptev said .
`` Our strength in carrying out this epoch-making project is in our unity , in our support for each other . ''
The first manned flight to the space station has been set tentatively for October , when Russians Sergei Krikalyov and Yury Gidzenko and American Bill Shepherd are scheduled to become the first crew to inhabit the space ship .
The launch came almost 25 years to the day after the historic Apollo - Soyuz mission , the first joint space effort by Moscow and Washington , which laid the groundwork for today 's cooperation .
On July 15 , 1975 , the United States launched an Apollo spaceship and the Soviet Union launched a Soyuz craft .
Two days later , they docked in space .
Four of the astronauts on that mission , Americans Tom Stafford and Vance Brand and Russians Alexei Leonov and Valery Kubasov , were on hand to witness Wednesday 's launch .
A fifth crew member , American Donald `` Deke '' Slayton , died in 1993 .
`` We have waited for this for a long time .
Our cooperation with the Americans in space , which we began 25 years ago , depends on this launch , '' Kubasov said .
`` When we started this we hoped it would continue . ''
As the Zvezda shot into space , Stafford , the US commander of Apollo - Soyuz , cheered it on .
` Come on , go baby go , '' said Stafford , now 69 , as he pumped his fist .
The United States initiated the International Space Station project in 1984 .
When completed , its supporters say it will be a giant laboratory in space with a living area equal to a 747 jumbo jet .
Some officials , however , have complained about the station 's high price tag -- some estimates say the original $ 60 billion cost will climb as high as $ 95 billion -- and some scientists have questioned whether the project is worthwhile .
The first manned space station was Skylab , which the United States launched and maintained from May 1973 until July 1979 .
In February 1986 , the Soviet Union launched the Mir space station , which remains in orbit .
Moscow planned to abandon the Mir last year , but it has since found foreign investors to keep it operational .
In 1993 , the United States brought Russia into the project to build the Zvezda , hoping to save time and money .
But Russia , with just a $ 100 million annual budget for its space program , was unable to produce the Zvezda module on schedule .
The Zvezda was finally ready last year , but a scheduled launch in November was delayed after two Proton rockets crashed onto Kazakhstan 's steppe .
Afraid to risk losing Zvezda , Moscow delayed the launch until engineers could work out the kinks in the massive Proton rockets , the world 's biggest .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">The delays added an estimated $ 3 billion to the cost of the space station .
NASA officials have claimed in the past that funds targeted for the Zvezda were diverted to keep the Mir space station , an object of intense pride for the Russian space program , in orbit .</ENAMEX>
In April of last year , Goldin told Congress that Moscow `` always seem to have a little extra money around for Mir but not for the International Space Station . ''
The General Accounting Office , the investigative arm of the US Congress , has warned that crews will face increased risk and noise because of Russia 's failure to meet NASA safety standards .
The Baikonur Launch Facility , where the Zvezda module lifted off at 10 : 56 a.m. local time -LRB- 12 : 56 AM EDT -RRB- , is the world 's largest , occupying 2,700 square miles of barren steppe .
Russia rents Baikonur from Kazakhstan for $ 150 million a year and pays the Kazakh government a commission of 3 percent-5 percent on commercial launches there .
Baikonur was the launch site for the once-formidable Soviet space program 's greatest triumphs .
It was here that the space race began when the Soviet Union shocked and terrified the world by launching Sputnik on Oct. 4 , 1957 .
And it was here , on April 12 , 1961 , where Yury Gagarin blasted off in the spacecraft Vostok -- gleefully shouting `` Away we go ! '' -- on his way to becoming the first man in space .
