WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- The Clinton administration 's annual report on foreign trade barriers says China , the European Union and Japan continue to have unfair practices that hurt U.S. exports , services and agricultural goods .
The survey , released today by the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative , lists significant practices harmful to American products by 54 trading partners , including its six largest : Canada , China , the European Union , Japan , South Korea and Mexico .
According to the report , the administration found China 's `` interlocking and pernicious market access barriers '' a serious concern .
`` China 's tariffs remain high , particularly when compared to those of other major participants in the global trading system and restrictive licensing , investment , and distribution practices make it difficult for exporters to penetrate Chinese wholesale and consumer markets , '' the report said .
However , the administration said it was encouraged by China 's recent progress in enforcing anti-piracy efforts to protect computer software , videos and CD - ROMs .
Although U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky left Beijing this week without reaching a deal to allow China to join the World Trade Organization , the report said the administration is `` actively engaged in negotiations '' to secure the goal `` on commercially meaningful terms . ''
On its economic relationship with Europe , `` the largest and most complex in the world , '' the administration said that battles with the European Union over bananas and beef have `` not only hurt U.S. exports but have undermined the credibility of the WTO dispute settlement system . ''
Despite hundreds of billions of dollars that are exchanged unhindered in annual two-way trade and investments , the report found that `` the EU 's protectionist agriculture policies are likely to continue to cause disputes , unless addressed in upcoming multilateral trade negotiations . ''
The administration , in its segment on Japan , said the country continues to make opening its markets to U.S. exports a top priority , `` emphasizing the need for implementation of fiscal stimulus and reform of Japan 's financial sector . ''
It said the administration would press Japan to implement further deregulation measures in telecommunications , medical devices , housing and pharmaceuticals .
The report called South Korea `` one of the toughest markets in the world for doing business . ''
It commended the current Korean administration for implementing efforts to put its economy on a more open , market-oriented basis , in response to the Asian financial crisis .
`` Resistance to key trade reforms remains , however , and many issues have arisen on Korea 's compliance with its international obligations , '' the report said .
