NEW DELHI , India
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Opinion leaders from 16 Asian developing nations preached caution on foreign investment but reached no consensus Thursday on whether to offer unrestricted access to foreign corporations .
The developing nations also want mandatory transfers of technology from multinational corporations when investments are made in local markets , the statement said .
`` Participants ... have been of the view that host developing countries should exercise discretion to selectively permit foreign direct investment in priority areas in line with their national development objectives , '' the Indian government said in a statement after the two-day talks on international investment arrangements .
India hosted the meeting of government officials , industry leaders and nongovernmental organizations with the U.N. Conference on Trade and Development to discuss international investment .
U.N. officials said the conference was to familiarize developing nations with existing investment arrangements .
The discussions were closed to the press .
Experts explained the range of options available to governments trying -- from regulating which companies to let into the market to keeping certain areas of the economy off-limits .
`` The views expressed ranged from the opinion that there was no need for an international investment regime that was legally binding , to the view that bilateral investment promotion agreements were sufficient to enhance FDI flows , '' the statement said .
The participating countries were Azerbaijan , Bangladesh , North Korea , South Korea , India , Indonesia , Malaysia , Maldives , Mongolia , Nepal , Pakistan , The Philippines , Singapore , Sri Lanka , Thailand and Vietnam .
In April this year , trade and finance ministers from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development , which comprises the world 's richest nations , postponed for six months negotiations talks on the Multilateral Agreement on Investment , which would set international rules for billions of investment dollars .
