SEOUL --
The story of the creation of Daewoo was also the story of the rise of South Korea .
Over just three decades , Kim Woo Choong , a former shipyard worker of modest means , built , through energy , guts and determination , a global industrial giant that reached from automobiles and electronics to financial services and construction .
The conglomerate 's allegorical power has therefore given its decline an uncomfortable significance for South Koreans .
On Aug. 16 , Daewoo 's long-suffering creditor banks announced a government-orchestrated plan to dismantle the sprawling group , signalling what they hope will be the final chapter in a protracted crisis that has cast a cloud over South Korea 's recovery .
When that cloud clears , Daewoo -LRB- `` Great Universe '' -RRB- , the name Kim chose in 1967 when the firm was just a tiny speck in what was then one of the poorest countries in Asia , will remain only on its cars and trading operation , according to the plan .
The rest of its dozens of Korean businesses are to be sold off by the end of the year .
Daewoo has already announced that an investment group of American banks has agreed to buy most of its electronics business for $ 3.2 billion .
In exchange for all this , the government will prevent the creditor banks from forcing the firm into bankruptcy and liquidation .
Despite Daewoo 's long-standing financial troubles , led by its $ 50 billion in debt , the near-collapse of the group in July still shocked many Koreans .
They had believed that Hyundai , Daewoo , Samsung and LG , the four biggest chaebol or family-controlled business groups , were too big to fail .
In a sense , they were right .
For all the government 's tough talk and Kim Dae Jung 's televised speech on Aug. 15 in which he claimed he would be the first South Korean president to dare to reform the chaebol , neither government nor banks plan to liquidate a single Daewoo company , for fear of rising unemployment .
Daewoo companies and their subcontractors employ some 2.5 million people in Korea alone , which -- as a government official admits -- is the main reason for rescuing the group .
Nor was there any mention of Daewoo 's scores of overseas subsidiaries , which are often tangled in complicated business and financial relationships that go far beyond South Korea 's banks .
Even achieving the restructuring announced this week will be tough .
There are more than 60 Korean creditor banks in the negotiations , and not all of them are controlled by the government .
Foreign banks , which together extended $ 9.9 billion of loans to Daewoo , are even harder to keep in order .
Cash and loans flowed freely between Daewoo subsidiaries regardless of shareholder interests and so , if any one of the creditors calls in loans and bankrupts a Daewoo company , it could pull the whole lot down .
Finding buyers for Daewoo 's businesses will be hard too .
The group announced last April that it wanted to sell its shipbuilding operation but has yet to find a taker .
Creditors hope General Motors -LRB- GM -RRB- will take over a controlling stake of Daewoo Motor , but the American car giant is refusing to be rushed into a deal .
After a joint venture fell apart in 1992 over Daewoo 's plans to enter the American car market , relations between the two companies have been prickly .
Creditors want to merge Ssangyong Motors , which Daewoo acquired last year , with Daewoo Motor as part of the deal .
But when Daewoo and GM signed a memorandum of understanding early this month to collaborate on new car production in South Korea , Ssangyong was not included -LRB- the fact that it lost $ 417 million last year may have had something to do with that -RRB- .
In addition , any buyer of Daewoo Motor will have to invest hundreds of millions of dollars in plants that Daewoo left incomplete .
Daewoo 's financial trouble came to a head only last month , but its failure was a long time coming .
Last year , when the economic crisis forced most of the chaebol to cut back , Daewoo brazenly added 14 new firms to its existing 275 subsidiaries -- and this in a year where the group lost a combined 550 billion won -LRB- $ 458 million -RRB- on sales of 62 trillion won -LRB- $ 51 billion -RRB- .
At the end of 1997 , South Korea 's four biggest chaebol averaged debt of nearly five times their equity .
But while Samsung and LG cut back during the subsequent year of economic crisis , Daewoo acted as if nothing had changed : it added 40 percent more debt .
But it was not alone in this : Hyundai 's already large debt grew larger , and it , too , went on an acquisition spree , buying Kia Motors , LG Semicon and an oil refinery .
Hyundai and Daewoo are the only top chaebol that are still run by the mercurial tycoons who founded them .
Kim is used to making investment decisions on the spot , based on hunches .
Although officially retired , Hyundai 's Chung Ju Yung still exerts strong influence on the group 's affairs and few of his managers will challenge his authority .
Kim 's managers defer to him absolutely .
Why is Kim , and not Chung , now facing the humiliating public dismantling of his business empire ?
The answer boils down to politics and paper .
The government believes that the recovering economy can now handle one big corporate crisis , but worries it might tumble again with two -- especially one involving South Korea 's largest firm .
Besides , Daewoo 's finances really are worse than Hyundai 's .
Aside from having a higher debt-to-equity ratio than Hyundai , it was particularly dependent on short-term debts .
In October , the government put a ceiling on the total value of bonds and commercial paper which the top five chaebol could issue , thus cutting off Daewoo 's access to capital and eventually precipitating its near-bankruptcy .
By bringing Daewoo to the brink , President Kim has shown he can indeed challenge the chaebol .
But he has yet to prove he can save them .
___________________ -LRB- To publish this excellent 1,000-word ECONOMIST article , it must be purchased from the New York Times Syndicate 's sales representative DEBRA WEYDERT at 732-390-4480 , or fax her at 732-390-4697 .
If you prefer , she can also be reached via e-mail at : Debra/Weydert/CORPHQ/NYTIMES -LRB- at -RRB- nytimes.com .
If unable to reach Ms. Weydert , please call 800-444-0267 , or fax us at 816-822-1444 . -RRB-
-LRB- EDITORS : Please note that this article is NOT available to clients in Canada EXCEPT to The Toronto Globe & Mail . -RRB-
