TOKYO --
Bowing to pressure to bring its debt levels down from stratospheric levels , the Hyundai Group , South Korea 's largest conglomerate , said Friday it would sell 11 of its affiliates in an effort to raise more than $ 5 billion .
The Hyundai Group , which makes everything from cars to computer chips , has been criticized for increasing its debt during South Korea 's economic crisis , which began more than a year ago .
In the first 11 months of 1998 , as the Korean economy slid into an abyss and many of Hyundai 's core businesses declined dramatically , the group 's debt rose by $ 1.5 billion , to more than $ 36 billion .
Few details were immediately available about the planned disposal of assets .
Park Se Yong , the head of Hyundai 's restructuring activities , told reporters in Seoul today that the companies to be sold have total assets of $ 16 billion .
The Hyundai Electronics Industries Co. , an arm of the group , also plans to sell any of its operations that do not directly relate to its core computer-chip business by the end of this year .
By doing so , the company hopes to raise money to finance its purchase of the LG Semicon Co. , its former chip-making rival , from another Korean conglomerate , the LG Group .
The two chip makers are merging as part of the so-called Big Bang , the South Korean government 's effort to reduce overcapacity in its industries .
The government is forcing the country 's five largest family-dominated conglomerates , called chaebol , to swap businesses among themselves so that , for example , some emerge dominant in automobile manufacturing while others become high-technology giants .
The purchase of LG Semicon is expected to add some $ 3.8 billion in debt to the Hyundai Group 's financial obligations .
The group 's purchase of the insolvent Kia Motors Corp. will increase its debt by another $ 5.5 billion .
Hyundai , LG and Korea 's three other large conglomerates -- Samsung , Daewoo and SK -- so far have avoided the sweeping overhauls forced on some of their smaller brethren by South Korea 's economic slump .
They still have relatively free access to credit and tapped the local bond markets regularly in 1998 .
