WASHINGTON --
Top California semiconductor makers said Wednesday that failure by Congress to normalize trade with China would be tantamount to `` open season '' on U.S. companies by foreign competitors .
Not normalizing relations would lock high-tech companies out of market-opening measures China negotiated with the Clinton administration and grant those benefits instead to competitors in Europe and Southeast Asia , business leaders said .
Craig Barrett , chief executive officer of Intel Corp. , John Dickson , president of Lucent Technologies , and T.J. Rodgers , chief executive of Cypress Semiconductor , said a `` no '' vote by Congress could hurt the high-tech industry in one of the world 's fastest-growing markets .
`` I just do n't want to be up against a structural disadvantage in the world 's largest market '' against competitors in Japan , Korea , and elsewhere , said Barrett .
Executives conceded , however , that they face an uphill struggle to approve legislation President Clinton submitted last week to grant permanent normal trade relations with China as part of China 's expected entry into the World Trade Organization .
Unions , consumer activists and environmental groups are waging an all-out drive to defeat the measure , arguing that China 's poor record on labor and human rights should not be rewarded with U.S. trade concessions .
Both sides are escalating the stakes in what is turning into an explosive election-year battle on Capitol Hill .
Unions are exerting tremendous pressure on wavering Democrats , while industry is making it equally clear that the China vote is not one they will forget .
Vice President Al Gore this week said he would lobby Congress to normalize trade relations with Beijing .
His support had been in doubt because unions are major backers of his presidential candidacy .
`` A vote against this is a vote against high tech and it 's a vote against high-tech jobs in California , '' said Michael Maibach , Intel 's head of government affairs .
In return for U.S. approval of China 's WTO entry , the administration last November secured a huge market-opening trade pact with China that would slash Chinese tariffs and other market barriers across key industries , from telecommunications and Internet investment to automobiles and agriculture .
But once China enters the WTO -- as it is expected to do regardless of any action by Congress -- WTO rules require that all member nations trade on equal terms with each other .
If Congress refuses to normalize trade with China , instead leaving it contingent as it is now on annual congressional approval , China could , under WTO rules , refuse to grant the same market access to U.S. companies that it gives to everyone else .
Chinese officials have threatened to do just that if Congress fails to approve permanent normal trade relations .
Indeed , under WTO rules , China would be required to grant other countries the market-access measures it negotiated with the United States , even if it excluded U.S. companies .
Opponents called the argument `` self-serving nonsense , '' contending that China needs the U.S. market -- which comprises 41 percent of China 's total exports -- even more than U.S. companies need China 's .
`` The U.S. for all intents and purposes is China 's export market , '' said Scott Nova , director of the Citizens Trade Campaign , a coalition of unions , consumer activist groups and environmental organizations .
Rep. Nancy Pelosi , D - San Francisco , said that China has repeatedly broken its commitments in the past , and first should have to demonstrate that it will live up to the new trade agreement .
China has broken a raft of agreements on everything from prison labor to intellectual property protection to weapons proliferation , she said .
`` I do n't know why everybody is in this big rush ... to squander all of our leverage for products made in America in order to accommodate our preeminent products , which would be competitive in any international arena under any circumstances , '' Pelosi added .
But other U.S. industries would face similar problems if relations are not normalized , said Rep. Cal Dooley , a Kings County Democrat pushing hard for normalizing trade with China .
`` You do n't have to be a rocket scientist to understand , '' Dooley said , `` that if China has the choice to import grain from Canada or the U.S. , when the U.S. is going to have a 40 percent tariff versus 12 percent for Canada , it 's pretty clear who 's going to get the deal , and it 's not going to be U.S. farmers . ''
-LRB- For use by New York Times News Service Clients -RRB-
