SEOUL , October 3 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- <ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The decision by the United States Wednesday to invoke the Super 301 Section against South Korea in order to press for a wider opening in the auto market has set off alarm bells in the South Korean automobile industry .</ENAMEX>
The industry , which is facing a domestic crisis involving the the unsettled Kia troubles , is concerned that the decision will send shock waves throughout the country if the results of ensuing auto negotiations with the U.S. go sour .
After the termination of the anti-bankruptcy pact for the financially-strapped Kia Group , a number of auto parts suppliers and subcontractors to Kia already went belly-up , and other firms are nearing bankruptcy .
The exports of Kia Motors Corporation plunged from 40,000 units in July to 20,000 units in August and September as the motor company was placed under the anti-bankruptcy pact .
To make things worse , the Seoul - Washington trade dispute over Seoul 's car imports will also lead to a significant drop in car exports to the U.S. , market , watchers said .
If the U.S. places the Super 301 Section Act on South Korea , the domestic auto export to North America , which stood at about 200,000 units last year , is likely to plummet significantly , they said .
Hyundai Motor Co. , which ships more than 100,000 of its cars to the U.S. market , expressed the concern that the latest U.S. action would tarnish the image of South Korean cars among American dealers and potential customers .
Daewoo Motors , which plans to ship three models to the U.S. market starting from early next year , is also concerned that the Super 301 will become a great hurdle to its marketing strategy .
Meanwhile , the Korean Automobile Manufacturers Association -LRB- KAMA -RRB- said it would map out its own strategy to cope with the situation .
KAMA stressed that it would be very painful to accept the U.S. request to lower South Korea 's auto tariff rate to 2.5 percent , from the current 8 percent .
Compromise , however , should be focused on adjusting South Korea 's existing capacity , according to the association .
