WASHINGTON , October 1 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Acting U.S. Trade Representative -LRB- USTR -RRB- Charlene Barshefsky announced today that Indonesia , Brazil , Australia and Argentina are the four targets of new investigations of trade barriers under Section 301 of the U.S. Trade Act of 1974 .
Three of them invoke World Trade Organization -LRB- WTO -RRB- dispute settlement , Barshefsky said at a press conference .
She listed the four new investigations of unfair foreign trade barriers as Indonesia 's national auto policy , Brazil 's auto program , Australia 's export subsidies and Argentina 's import duties .
She said that Indonesia has recently expanded a domestic auto policy that offers tax and tariff incentives to increase the local ownership of automotive companies in Indonesia and the local content of the automobiles they manufacture .
As this policy adversely affects U.S. exports of autos and auto parts to Indonesia , she said , the USTR will invoke WTO dispute settlement in the context of an investigation under Section 301 .
She said that Brazil offers auto manufacturers reduced duties on imports of assembled cars and other benefits if they export sufficient quantities of parts and vehicles and promise to meet local content targets in their Brazilian plants .
This program adversely affects U.S. exports of autos and auto parts to Brazil , she said .
After consultation with Brazil in last August , she said , Brazil has agreed to enter into intensive talks with the United States .
If no measures are taken by Brazil after 90 days of talks , she said , the USTR will take further steps to settle the problem under WTO dispute settlement procedures .
She said that as Australia provides significant export subsidies contrary to its obligations under the WTO Agreement , the USTR will invoke WTO dispute settlement in the context of an investigation under Section 301 .
She said that as Argentina maintains specific import duties on textiles , apparel and footwear that exceed the rate of 35 percent ad valorem , and also maintains other WTO -inconsistent import barriers , the USTR will invoke WTO dispute settlement in context of an investigation under Section 301 to challenge these Argentine practices .
She said that the United States has secured significant agreements providing increased market access for autos in Japan and Korea over the last year and is carefully monitoring those agreements to ensure full compliance .
The national car program in China is also being addressed bilaterally and in the context of negotiations on China 's accession to the WTO , she added .
She said that the United States has accelerated its use of the dispute settlement provisions of the WTO to address significant foreign trade barriers .
Since the WTO began operation 21 months ago , she said , the United States has invoked the new WTO dispute settlement procedures in 20 cases to enforce the WTO agreements , including the three new WTO disputes as a result of the 1996 Super 301 annual review .
Citing the disputes with Japan on taxes on liquor imports and with the European Union on its imports of grains as examples , she said the WTO dispute settlement procedures have already yield positive results .
