BRUSSELS , October 8 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The European Commission , the executive body of the 15-nation European Union , has been considering taking action against South Korea for restricting imports of foreign cars .
The consideration was prompted by complaints from the European Automobile Manufacturers ' Association -LRB- ACEA -RRB- which said in the first half of 1997 , new sales of European passenger cars in South Korea declined by 33 percent to 2,284 vehicles .
In 1996 , the European share of the South Korean domestic market was an insignificant 0.51 percent , whereas South Korean car makers like Hyundai and Daewoo have made inroads into the European market , increasing their joint share by 38 percent to 253,000 vehicles .
The ACEA complained that South Korea has joined the ranks of industrialized economies and the sales of European cars in South Korea reflect discrimination rather than just buying power or consumer taste .
`` There is little doubt that these figures are the result of the -LRB- South -RRB- Korean government 's action to keep its market closed , '' said ACEA Secretary General Camille Blum .
`` In spite of all the promises made by the -LRB- South -RRB- Korean authorities even recently , '' he added , `` to open their markets to European passenger cars , it is even more closed than ever . ''
Under a 1995 trade agreement , South Korea agreed to certain tariff , tax and regulatory reforms to pry open a car market where imports are less than 1 percent of the total .
Since then , however , the Seoul government was blamed to have reneged on some of its commitments and foreign exports to the Asian country have remained negligible .
The ACEA complained that South Korea still has in place an imposing array of cumulative tariff and tax disincentives that disproportionately affect imports .
The United States has already put South Korea on its trade watchlist because of its car policy .
European Commission officials are also examining wider allegations of restrictive public procurement practices , fiscal incentives for domestic suppliers , increased import duties and restrictions on spending by South Korean tourists abroad .
