SEOUL , May 16 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- South Korea and Japan are competing fiercely in international markets , with 67 percent of South Korean exports competing directly against Japanese products .
Out of the 67 percent of South Korean products , only eight percent are seen superior to those from Japan while 27 percent of the latter 's goods are favored over those from the former , according to a report issued by the Bank of Korea .
When considering that only 10 percent of South Korean products compete against Chinese goods and 22 percent of Chinese items against South Korean goods , the competition between South Korea and Japan is very fierce .
South Korean goods compete against Japanese products in a wide range of markets , including electronics , automobiles , shipbuilding , steel , machinery , chemicals and even fabrics .
The report shows that with superiority for some electronic parts and components , including dynamic random access memory chips , and fabrics , most South Korean products are inferior to Japanese ones , making it difficult for South Korean companies to increase their international market share .
Meanwhile , imports from Japan to South Korea are four times exports from South Korea to Japan .
Last year , 20.2 percent of South Korea 's imports were from Japan while the island country 's 5.1 percent of imports were from South Korea .
The percentage of South Korean imports from Japan has been decreasing from 24.1 percent in 1995 , but still remains very high while South Korean items are still struggling hard in the Japanese market .
As a result , the trade deficit with Japan reached 8.3 billion U. S. dollars last year and 2.9 billion in the first three months this year alone , indicating that the trade gap between the two nations is expected to grow as the South Korean economy remains vibrant with strong exports .
South Korean companies have to improve their competitiveness against Japanese firms if they are to expand their international market share , the report pointed out .
