COLOMBO , Sri Lanka
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Frustrated with the separatist war that is bogging down the economy , Sri Lanka 's top entrepreneurs are taking a lead to help find a solution to the 15-year -old insurrection , a spokesman for the forum said Tuesday .
Top representatives from the Chambers of Commerce , Industries , Employers Federations , Exporters Associations and private businessmen will be meeting in Colombo Thursday with political parties , to discuss how best the Tamil separatist issue can be resolved , said Anusha David , who is coordinating the conference .
Embassies and non-governmental organizations have also been invited to take part in the talks .
The meeting has been welcomed by the government .
`` It is a national issue that civil society cannot ignore .
We strongly support the initiative , '' said Constitutional Affairs Minister Lakshman Peiris .
Among the business leaders taking part in the meeting are Ken Balendra , a Tamil , who is chairman of the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce and chief of Keels , Sri Lanka 's best known supermarket chain , and Deshamanya Lalith Kotewala , chairman of the Ceylinco Group , a top trading house that runs banks and insurance companies .
Kotewala is a Sinhalese .
Sri Lanka 's economy grew at an annual rate of around 5 percent in the past five years .
If the war were resolved , economists say it could pick up to about 7 percent .
While the forum is unlikely to solve the ethnic conflict , it can send a message that talks between rebels and the government is the only way to end the protracted war .
Sri Lanka 's top opposition party has urged the government to unconditionally resume talks with the Tamil Tigers .
President Chandrika Kumaratunga has said she is ready for talks , but only if the guerrillas first disarm .
The Tigers have expressed no interest in reviving the talks that broke down in 1995 .
Sri Lanka 's modern civil war was born of an ancient ethnic conflict between the majority Buddhist Sinhalese , who make up 76 percent of Sri Lanka 's 18.5 million people , and the largely Hindu Tamils who are 18 percent of the population .
About 55,000 people have been killed since the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam led a Tamil insurrection for independence in 1983 .
