<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">COLOMBO , Sri Lanka
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Velupillai Prabhakaran and seven other leaders of the Tamil Tiger rebels will be tried in absentia for the 1996 bombing of the Sri Lankan capital 's business district in which 78 people were killed , court officials said Wednesday .
Judge A.W. Somawansa ordered the trial Tuesday after prosecution lawyers said Prabhakaran , who heads the separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam , was living in the northern jungles of Sri Lanka which are not under the control of government troops .</ENAMEX>
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Prabhakaran , 42 , and seven other guerrillas were indicted for the January 1996 bombing of the Central Bank that reduced Colombo 's business district to rubble</ENAMEX> .
The massive truck bomb killed 78 people and wounded 1,400 .
Police filed charges against the rebels but the cases could not proceed because most of the accused are in hiding .
Two of the eight are in custody .
Last year , a Sri Lankan judge ordered newspaper advertisements calling on the Tamil Tiger leader to surrender .
Each of the eight men are facing 90 charges , including 78 counts of murder .
Prosecutors have listed 472 witnesses .
Prabhakaran already has been sentenced to death by a court in India for involvement in the 1991 assassination of former Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi .
He has denied ordering the killing .
Prabhakaran also is wanted for the 1994 killing of Sri Lankan opposition presidential candidate Gamini Dissanayake and for the 1996 bombing of a passenger train in Colombo in which 64 civilians were killed and 400 wounded .
Prabhakaran founded the LTTE in 1973 , demanding a separate state in Sri Lanka 's northeast for minority Tamils who comprise 18 percent of the country 's 18.5 million people .
Tamils claim discrimination by the majority Sinhalese who dominate the government and military .
The antagonism flared into open war after anti- Tamil riots in 1983 .
Since then , more than 55,000 people have been killed in fighting between government troops and the Tamil Tigers .
The Tigers are notorious for using suicide bombers to attack military and economic targets and political leaders .
Few rebel fighters have been captured alive because they carry vials of cyanide which they consume when they fear capture .
