COLOMBO , Sri Lanka
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Sri Lanka 's main political party on Sunday welcomed the Tamil Tiger rebels ' offer for peace talks , but the government seemed cautious .
`` The long awaited response has now come out , '' Joseph Pararajasingham , one of the top leaders of the Tamil United Liberation Front , said in a statement .
The TULF , a political party , urged the government to respond positively .
There was no official statement from the government , but the state-run Sunday Observer said the government was cautious about the talks offer .
`` Government officials would not take -LRB- a -RRB- definite position on the Tiger leader 's statement , '' the paper said .
`` They argued that , given the fluid situation of the conflict , the government needed to be flexible on its stance on various aspects . ''
But hope for an end to hostilities was marred Sunday when Tamil Tiger guerrillas attacked a Sri Lankan army patrol and killed eight soldiers in the eastern town of Trincomalee , 230 kilometers -LRB- 140 miles -RRB- west of Colombo .
The Tamil rebel commander on Friday said he was ready for peace talks to end the 15-year war that has killed more than 57,000 people and disintegrated this island nation off India 's southern coast .
`` We have not closed the door for peace .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">We are open to the civilized method of resolving conflict through rational dialogue , '' Velupillai Prabhakaran , leader of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam , said in his annual broadcast over the clandestine Voice of Tigers .</ENAMEX>
`` We aspire to live in peace fully with freedom and dignity , without the interference of anyone , in our own soil in our motherland , where we were born and bred , '' he said .
`` We , too , are human beings . ''
Last year , by contrast , Prabhakaran told his followers that liberation was not a gift , but is `` achieved by shedding blood and through hard struggle . ''
Prabhakaran founded the Tigers in 1976 and commands the organization alone and unchallenged .
Rebels say that Tamils , who are 18 percent of Sri Lanka 's 18.5 million people , are discriminated against and can only prosper in a homeland not dominated by the Sinhalese , who make up 76 percent of the population .
On Sunday , Prabhakaran said he preferred third-party mediation , and would not accept preconditions such as disarming .
In the past , the government has demanded the Tigers relinquish some weapons before talks could begin and has said it would accept an outside facilitator , but not third-party mediation .
The government has been skeptical about previous peace signals from the Tigers , known as the LTTE , since the rebels abruptly ended a three-month cease-fire and broke off peace talks in 1995 .
Douglas Devananda , a former rebel leader who now heads the Eelam Peoples Democratic Front , said his group was in favor of starting peace talks as soon as possible .
`` Now again the LTTE leader has said that the doors are open for talks .
Even the government leaders also say that the doors are open for talks .
So why ca n't the two sides start talking , '' Devananda said in a statement .
