COLOMBO , Sri Lanka --
Though it is on the defensive militarily , the Sri Lankan government on Monday night firmly rejected a separatist Tamil group 's offer of a cease-fire in exchange for the government 's promise to withdraw tens of thousands of its troops from the northern Jaffna peninsula .
The government 's director of information , Ariya Rubasinghe , confirmed that the government had no intention of pulling out of the small peninsula at the country 's northern tip .
President Chandrika Kumaratunga , who survived an assassination attempt by a separatist suicide bomber , did not refer to the cease-fire offer in a nationally televised address , but said the government would stay and fight the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam .
The rebel group is notorious for its suicide attacks and has been labeled a terrorist organization by the United States .
The eye patch that had covered Kumaratunga 's eye , injured in the December assassination attempt , was gone tonight when she declared in Sinhalese , `` We shall leave no room for the LTTE to again fasten their fascist grip on half a million Tamil people in Jaffna . ''
But Kumaratunga 's decision was a risky one .
The Tigers have been on a successful military march to reclaim Jaffna , the cultural capital of the Hindu Tamil -dominated north in this majority Buddhist Sinhalese nation .
For the first time in the 18-year -old civil war -- which has claimed more than 60,000 lives in a country with a population no larger than New York State 's -- the rebels control Elephant Pass , which an opposition leader has called the doorway to the fortress of Jaffna .
Since 1995 , the government has controlled Jaffna , but for five years before that the Tigers , who seek a separate Tamil homeland , ran what was essentially a small state there .
Elephant Pass is a narrow strip of land connecting the mainland to the peninsula and the site of one of the most heavily fortified military bases in the country .
On April 22 , with military moves like those of a conventional army , the rebels took the pass .
Last week , the government banned political rallies and union strikes and tightened a vise of press censorship in what it said was an effort to protect national security , but that the opposition said was an attempt by the government to hide the government 's own failings .
The Tigers said in a statement from their London office on Monday that they were willing to observe a cease-fire once the government surrenders Jaffna , which the rebels said could open the way to peace talks .
`` The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam wishes to state that it is prepared to declare a temporary cease fire suspending all armed hostilities against the Sri Lankan armed forces to facilitate the beleaguered government troops to be evacuated safely from the Jaffna peninsula , '' the group 's statement said .
Fears of a large force of demoralized government troops ' being trapped on the Jaffna peninsula and hostage to the Tigers have led some here to hope that India , the region 's great power , would intervene .
India 's prime minister , Atal Behari Vajpayee , met with the leaders of 20 political parties on Monday to discuss the conflict in Sri Lanka .
India has a much larger Tamil population than Sri Lanka in the politically potent southern state of Tamil Nadu .
And India supported Sri Lankan Tamil militants , including the Tigers , in the 1980s .
But India has to worry about stirring nationalist feeling among its own Tamil citizens .
And both Sri Lanka and India have an interest in holding together their ethnically and religiously diverse nations .
So India ruled out military intervention , though it was not clear that it would refuse to help evacuate troops .
In the late 1980s , India lost more than 1,000 troops on a long peacekeeping mission in Sri Lanka .
The parliamentary affairs minister , Pramod Mahajan , said after the meeting that India would only consider mediating between the Tigers and the Sri Lankan government if both sides wanted Indian help .
The role of mediator had fallen earlier this year to Norway , one of the nations the Tigers had deemed an acceptable intermediary .
The Sri Lankan political opposition leader , Ranil Wickremesinghe , said in an interview tonight that he believed that Norway and India might work together to try to broker a deal .
The bitter feuding between Kumaratunga and Wickremesinghe , who heads the United National Party , has been an important element in a failed attempt to get a peace plan through Parliament .
The opposition had opposed the government 's attempt to change the Constitution to give the Tamils greater autonomy in the north .
Lately , Kumaratunga and Wickremesinghe have been having their own peace talks , but any agreement they reach may be overtaken by military developments that -- up to now -- are tilting in the Tigers ' favor .
