COLOMBO , Sri Lanka --
Few have seen him , but a nation fears him .
He learned military strategy from West Point manuals , at secret Indian training camps , and from Clint Eastwood videos .
He cultivated savage endurance by poking pins under his nails , and schooled himself to be merciless by torturing insects to death with needles .
He commands cultish devotion from followers , although most have never met him .
Their reward for accepting a suicide mission is a first and last supper with the man they call Thavalar , `` The Leader . ''
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Short , pudgy-faced , and smiling in a photo on a Web site for his cause , Velupillai Prabhakaran may not look like a mastermind of assassinations of presidents , prime ministers , and civilians .</ENAMEX>
But Prabhakaran , a 45-year -old guerrilla leader who is fighting for a homeland , or eelam , for the Tamil minority on this island , is as ruthless and elusive as Cambodia 's Pol Pot , and as inspiring to his followers as Cuba 's Che Guevara .
It has been years since he granted any journalist an interview .
His 5,000 to 10,000 male and female guerrillas have been a relentless , untamable adversary for Sri Lanka 's military of 120,000 to 140,000 soldiers .
Even their enemies say the Tigers are stronger now than at any time since the Tamil separatist movement was founded in 1972 .
Sri Lanka 's armed forces , meanwhile , seem to be at their most beleaguered .
Since late last year , the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam , have overrun army bases and seized artillery , have gained ground in northern and eastern Sri Lanka , and have launched suicide bomb attacks , such as one in December that blinded the president of Sri Lanka in one eye and killed 22 bystanders .
Another bombing killed a cabinet minister .
Last month , the rebels nearly captured Jaffna , the northern city at the heart of the would-be Tamil state , after they lost it to government forces five years ago .
Senior Sri Lankan military officials say they have not been more worried in 17 years of this war between the largely Hindu Tamils and the largely Buddhist Sinhalese , which has claimed more than 62,000 lives .
-LRB- Both ethnic groups include significant minorities with other religious affiliations , including a sizable Christian Tamil community . -RRB-
Since the Tigers abandoned peace negotiations and broke a truce five years ago , Sri Lanka 's president , Chandrika Kumaratunga , has vowed to `` wage war for peace . ''
But the government 's refusal to carve up this island country , the size of West Virginia , to create a Tamil state has hardened Prabhakaran 's resolve .
Quite possibly the most disciplined and well-funded guerrilla force in the world , the Tigers are described by diplomats as more systematic and callous than the Irish Republican Army , more willing to die for their cause than the Middle East 's Hezbollah .
Outlawed as a terrorist organization in the United States and India as well as in Sri Lanka , the Tigers have become among the biggest nongovernmental arms buyers in Southeast Asia .
Supported by donations from Sri Lankan Tamil emigres and revenue from commercial enterprises , the Tigers are also alleged to have profited from drug trafficking , though that has not been proved .
But perhaps the main reason for the movement 's effectiveness is neither money nor weaponry , but blind dedication to an idea , and to the man behind it .
For decades , many Tamils have nursed deep resentment against perceived discrimination and persecution by the majority Sinhalese .
But the `` Tamil cause '' is complex and nuanced , and by no means do Prabhakaran and the Tigers represent all Tamils , who make up 18 percent of the population .
Ceylon Tamils , who claim roots on the island for 1,500 years , tend to want an independent homeland , while so-called Indian Tamils , whose ancestors came to work on tea plantations in the 1800 's , tend to favor national unity .
Even among those who want a Tamil state , many are appalled by the Tigers ' methods and bemoan that people on both sides are susffering needlessly .
`` Prabhakaran is single-minded , like a horse with blinders on .
He cares more about the Tigers than about the Tamil cause , '' Dharmalingam Sithadthan , president of the Peoples ' Liberation Organization of Tamil Eelam , said sadly .
A former Tamil militant who joined the democratic opposition , Sithadthan is on the Tigers ' hit list , he said , `` because anyone who opposes the LTTE is considered a traitor to the Tamil cause . ''
Growing rebel support For years , the Tamil militants were a fringe movement of radicals and Marxists .
But in 1983 , the cause began gaining wider support after authorities allowed rampaging Sinhalese mobs to kill hundreds of Tamils and to firebomb thousands of Tamil businesses and homes in retaliation for a Tiger attack that killed 13 Sinhalese soldiers .
In the years since , the Tigers have honed a almost-religious dedication that would be hard for any army to match .
A Sri Lankan cabinet minister put it simply : `` We fight to live .
They fight to die . ''
Each fighter -- about half are women -- is given a nom de guerre and forbidden to smoke , drink , or have sex .
They are permitted to marry at age 23 , but only after five years of service .
They take a vow to die rather than be captured and wear cyanide capsules on strings around their necks .
In the 1980s , Prabhakaran 's Tigers systematically wiped out rival groups of Tamil militants as well as moderates who favored a political settlement .
Tamils seen as traitors were lynched .
`` If he feels somebody is thinking against him , the next moment they are eliminated .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">The LTTE feels there must be only one leadership , and Prabhakaran does n't want anybody who 's stronger than he is , '' said K. Suresh Premachandran , secretary general of the Eeelam People 's Revolutionary Liberation Front and a former militant who fled Jaffna after the Tigers killed hundreds of rivals .</ENAMEX>
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Premachandran said the government has unwittingly built support for the Tigers by ignoring the demands of Tamil leaders like himself who laid down arms to join the political mainstream .</ENAMEX>
`` If the government wants an alternative to the LTTE , they should treat democratic Tamil parties better .
People now believe the government only understands the language of war , '' he said .
The Tigers , meanwhile , have created a virtual global corporation to fund that war , including about 11 cargo freighters , according to a leading shipping insurer .
They operate 45 offices in more than 40 countries -- more than the number of Sri Lankan embassies .
The Tigers reputedly raise more than $ 1 million a month from voluntary and pressured contributions from many of the more than 500,000 Tamils who fled Sri Lanka after the 1983 riots .
After Tiger fighters overran a key army base in April , elated Tamils are reported to have made $ 80 million in congratulatory pledges and gifts , including a BMW from a supporter in Canada .
A former Sri Lankan Air Force commander , Oliver Ranasinghe , acknowledged that accidental killings of civilians by government bombs have driven many Tamils into the arms of the Tigers .
`` That 's our fault ... there are mistakes made because we do n't have the proper equipment , '' he conceded .
But the LTTE , he asserted , places its camps close to villages to use Tamil civilians as human shields .
Politicians blamed Ranasinghe and others complain that the war has been mismanaged by politicians who tied the hands of the military .
Purchases of desperately-needed weapons have been delayed , he and other commanders said .
Several arms dealers said the purchases have been haphazard in times of crisis , leaving Sri Lankan forces with mismatched equipment and bargain-basement models .
Civilian leaders retort that they had to delay or cancel arms deals because corrupt officers were taking a cut .
They have also limited military purchases in order to maintain social programs that have endowed this country with some of the highest rates of literacy and life expectancy in the Third World .
The recent Tiger victories are also hard to explain entirely as a matter of inadequate government weaponry .
The army took nearly a year to gain control of huge swath of land in the north , but it lost it in four days of Tiger assaults last November .
An even bigger shock came two months ago with the Tiger victory at Elephant Pass , a key base blocking the neck of the Jaffna peninsula that had been declared impregnable by US special forces advisers , according to military sources .
The Tigers , with an estimated 1,800 guerrillas , managed to rout as many as 12,000 soldiers by cutting off their water supply .
Low morale is a natural outgrowth of a war that seems unwinnable against an opponent willing to die and take no prisoners , said Paikiasothy Saravanumuttu , executive director of the Centre for Policy Alternatives .
`` Does the average Sri Lankan soldier really know what he is fighting for ? ''
At the moment , Sri Lanka is holding its ground , following emergency arms purchases last month and a full-court press to hold Jaffna .
But long term , the pendulum is likely to swing .
That has some here saying the international community should pressure Sri Lanka to offer an autonomy package to Tamils .
`` If you ca n't kill them , you have to deal with them , and if you have to deal with them , you ca n't set the terms alone , '' Saravanamuttu said .
But for now , there is no sign that the government will grant the Tigers ' demand for a homeland -- or that Prabhakaran will accept anything less .
