<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">COLOMBO , November 28 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Sri Lanka 's Tamil rebel leader Velupillai Prabhakaran on Saturday reiterated the terms for peace talks to end the long-running ethnic conflict , said reports reaching here Sunday .
Prabhakaran of Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam -LRB- LTTE -RRB- called on the government to de-escalate the armed conflict and initiate peace talks under `` conditions of normalcy '' for a negotiated political settlement of the ethnic conflict .</ENAMEX>
In his Heroes ' Week message broadcast live over the clandestine Voice of Tigers Saturday evening , Prabhakaran said the peace talks would be held in a cordial atmosphere of mutual trust with the assistance of international third party mediation .
He also insisted that talks should be held in the `` absence of economic blockades . ''
The LTTE ended its Heroes ' Week remembrance celebrations on Saturday with a speech by Prabhakaran who turned 45 on Friday and ordered as a goodwill gesture the release of seven soldiers held by them .
Prabhakaran recalled that in the Heroes ' Week message last year , he had called for a third party mediation and emphasized the necessity of creating certain `` objective conditions conducive for peace talks . ''
The LTTE chief said the government refused to accept their proposal for creating a congenial peaceful atmosphere for peace talks .
The LTTE did not want to engage in a negotiating process with conditions and time frames , he said , adding that they had not abandoned the path of peace .
There was no immediate reaction from the government who has been actively engaged in the campaigning for the reelection of President Chandrika Kumaratunga in the presidential elections on December 21 .
President Kumaratunga has said the doors are open for talks if the LTTE rebels agree to lay down their arms , give up their demand for a separate homeland and accept a timeframe for negotiations .
Analysts here noted that there was a gap between the LTTE position of the need for an active mediator and government 's readiness to consider the possibility of a third party solely to facilitate talks between the two sides .
Sri Lanka has been plagued by a 16-year -old war between the majority Sinhalese dominated government troops and the LTTE rebels who have been fighting for a separate state in the north and east of the country .
