COLOMBO , December 18 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- For Sri Lanka , the tiny island nation in the Indian Ocean , peace is a dream that seems as remote as the Moon or the Mars in the sky and hard to come by .
As the year 1996 drawing to a close , the government and the Tamil rebels that have been locked in deadly fighting since 1983 are still not prepared to seek a solution of their conflict by other means .
And observers tend to believe that the civil war seems certain to go on indefinitely .
There are signs that the Sri Lankan government is ready for renewing peace talks with the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam -LRB- LTTE -RRB- with or without foreign mediation .
The British and Indian governments are willing to play that role .
But , preconditions laid down by both sides stand in the way of negotiations .
The government wants the LTTE to lay down their arms which the latter categorically refuses .
The LTTE want a ceasefire and the withdrawal of government troops from liberated areas which the government is not prepared to concede .
Under such circumstances , the peace in Sri Lanka seems a distant dream although it is of prime importance for the island nation to survive and develop alongside the rest of the Asia - Pacific region .
From the beginning of this year , the Sri Lankan government launched a massive recruitment drive for its armed forces .
It purchased large quantities of arms , ammunition and equipment .
It launched many conceived operations against the Tamil rebels successfully and captured areas earlier held by them .
The government forces were able to rout the rebels from their heartland , Jaffna city , last December .
Further successive operations enabled them to recapture the entire Jaffna Peninsula by May this year .
More combined operations enabled the forces to dislodge the rebels from many of their strongholds and finally in September they routed the rebels from their last bastion at Kilinochchi Town .
The forces are now consolidating their positions after having regained most of the lost territory and having captured large stocks of arms and ammunition from the rebels .
The rebels in desperation , having suffered these reversals in the North , sent suicide bombers to Colombo to raise havoc .
They blasted the Central Bank building and neighboring high-rise commercial buildings , causing much damage and destruction to the country 's economic center .
On that occasion over 90 persons were killed and over 1,400 others injured .
In July , they blasted an office train in Dehiwela , a suburban town of Colombo , where more than 70 died and over 500 were injured .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">In mid- October , Attorney General Sarath Silva filed indictments against rebel leader Velupillai Prabhakaran and nine others suspected to be behind the Central Bank bomb blast </ENAMEX>.
He was also examining India 's request for the extradition of Prabhakaran and others wanted for the slaying of former Indian prime minister Rajiv Gandhi who was assassinated by an LTTE woman suicide bomber .
This was the first time legal action was initiated by the government against the rebel leaders .
Senior military officials have expressed confidence that the war will end soon and peace will follow .
But President Chandrika Kumaratunga does not share their optimism .
She has reiterated time and again that the war will take more time to end and thereafter it will be a long arduous journey towards ultimate peace .
She has said that a military solution will not mean the end of the basic problem which requires a political solution .
She believes that this national issue can be resolved only through peaceful negotiation .
To this end , she exhorted last month the rebels to lay down arms and come to peace talks at an early date .
She has since repeated her call but the rebels have rejected these approaches again and again .
