COLOMBO , December 11 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- <ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">When leader of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam -LRB- LTTE -RRB- Velupillai Prabhakaran voiced the willingness to hold third party mediated peace talks in his `` Heroes Day '' speech on November 26</ENAMEX> , it seems that there is at last some light seen after the 15 blood-shedding years of war .
Considering Sri Lankan government 's sustained peace efforts , from both political and military angles , and the conditions the LTTE attached to the future negotiation , however , one can only foresee a bumpy road ahead to the lasting peace .
Sri Lanka 's current People 's Alliance -LRB- PA -RRB- government has been seeking some political settlement with the LTTE since its inauguration in 1994 .
The following move is the launch of a comprehensive set of proposals of devolution , the very concept of which constitutes the cardinal principle of the newly drafted constitution .
With an aim to promote ethnic harmony , this political package grants far reaching concessions to the ethnic Tamils , extending wide power to the regional authorities and making appointments of provincial governors on the recommendations of the provincial chief ministers .
Deliberately as it is planned , the LTTE , who gets the most consideration in the package , has totally rejected it .
On the other hand , the larger portion of the Sinhala community including the powerful Buddhist clergy are opposed to it on the ground that too much is being given to the Tamils .
Besides , the government 's inability to obtain support from other political parties , especially the approval of the major opposition party United National Party -LRB- UNP -RRB- , made it hard for the package to become law .
Despite the domestic setback of striking a political solution , however , the Sri Lankan government has managed to acquire a favorable international environment to solve the ethnic conflict .
India banned the LTTE in 1994 , and the United States and Canada declared it a terrorist organization in succession last year .
Only recently , Sri Lankan Foreign Minister 's South Africa trip brought an official denial of permitting LTTE to shift its so-call international secretariat there .
The exploration of political means for peace have n't slackened Sri Lankan government 's military attempts to settle the national conflict .
After `` Operation Jayasikuru '' -LRB- Sure Victory -RRB- launched on May 13 , 1997 , government troops recently assumed a new round of attacks against the LTTE under `` Operation Rivi Bala '' -LRB- Sun Force -RRB- .
Yet , the meager victories gained at the cost of heavy losses do not promise military settlements feasible either .
In fact , the Defense Ministry was forced to call off the former operation without achieving its main aim of establishing a land -based Main Supply Route along A9 highway to Jaffna .
For only a near two thirds of the highway was recaptured after 18 months , with an additional loss of Kilinochchi , an important county further north .
As to the latter operation , security forces are also facing the daunting task to prevent Tamil rebels ' infiltration and attacks after they have brought an area of 134 square kilometers under control .
Nevertheless , the unceasing political and military pressure at home and the worsening conditions abroad leave the LTTE no other way out but to accept the government 's call for peace talks .
However , the preconditions for peace talks in Prabhakaran 's speech are more than what the government can accept .
Prabhakaran 's call for third party mediation is in disparity with the stand of the government which has only third party facilitation in mind .
Since the government has long considered the conflict essentially an internal problem of Sri Lanka , it would be unwilling to accept such a condition which opens the door to internationalize the conflict , much to the detriment of Sri Lanka 's interests .
Then Prabhakaran 's demand for a climate of peace and goodwill created to hold peace talks makes the government , as well as people at large , suspicious of his sincerity .
In any case , the previous blunder made by the government in 1994 of being dragged into long-drawn-out negotiations with the LTTE on relatively trivial matters without addressing the real issues has taught it a lesson of acting warily .
The government 's hesitation so far to respond to Prabhakaran 's call for peace seems to show that it wants to be on the safe side this time .
Indeed , the hitherto witnessed fluctuating situation between victory and failure in the battlefield , and between war and peace on the negotiation indicates Sri Lanka 's road to the lasting peace is by no means smooth .
