COLOMBO , August 31 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- A new round of bipartisan talks is due to take place Wednesday -LRB- September 1 -RRB- between Sri Lanka 's ruling coalition and the main opposition party to work towards a mutually acceptable peace proposal by the end of September under a businessmen 's initiative .
Then the influential business leader , Lalith Kottelawala , is expected to meet the leader of separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam -LRB- LTTE -RRB- with the bipartisan proposals in the first week of October to broker peace for this war-ravaged island nation .
However , political analysts here said that in the run-up to the national elections expected next year , political parties will be reluctant to take a public stand on the emotional issue in fear it could lose their votes , and the two leading Sinhalese parties are mostly unlikely to agree with each other .
Sri Lanka has been plagued by a 16-year -old civil war fought between the Sinhalese majority controlled government and the LTTE rebels who demand a separate Tamil homeland in the north and east of the country .
More than 55,000 people have been killed in the conflict and the fighting has eroded investor confidence and slowed economic growth .
President Chandrika Kumaratunga unveiled a power-sharing political package four years ago to resolve the conflict through non-violent means .
The government had hoped to present the package before parliament this month but last month 's assassination of a co-author of the draft had dealt a heavy blow to the entire process .
Besides , Kumaratunga 's People 's Alliance -LRB- PA -RRB- government is unable to push through any radical legislation because it lacks the mandatory two-thirds majority in parliament and must have the support of the main opposition United National Party -LRB- UNP -RRB- to rewrite the constitution .
A spokesman for the UNP said they did not believe the government 's devolution plan could bring peace to the country as Tamil rebels had rejected the plan .
Sri Lanka 's Foreign Minister Lakshman Kadirgamar told the Foreign Correspondents ' Association recently that an end to the bloodshed could only be achieved with the backing of the LTTE .
Kadirgamar , a member of the minority Tamil community who is believed to top the LTTE hit list , said the actions of the LTTE guerrillas in resorting to devastating attacks showed they were unwilling to negotiate .
A.C. Hameed , leader of the UNP group to the bipartisan talks , has said it is very unlikely that the businessmen 's initiative would result in any talks with the LTTE given the complexities of the pre-election situation .
The businessmen 's initiative , led by Sri Lankan tycoons Lalith Kottelawala and Ken Balendra , is a bipartisan affair which depends on the formation of a consensus between the PA and the UNP ahead of any talks with the LTTE .
However , there are as many as seven major points of difference between the PA and the UNP .
The two parties have divergent views on basics , like the structure of the constitution , whether it should be unitary or federal , whether devolution should go beyond the present structure under the 13th Amendment , whether the north and the east should be united to form one Tamil province or cut up into two or three units .
Hameed felt that with such critical differences it is impossible to come to an understanding by September 30 , the deadline agreed upon in the last bipartisan meeting called by the businessmen 's initiative .
Within the PA government itself , there is skepticism about the September 30 deadline .
While Constitutional Affairs Minister G.L. Peiris , the leader of the PA group to the talks , had committed himself to it , Foreign Minister Lakshman Kadirgamar said that he did not believe in deadlines .
He told a news conference recently that a deadline was only a statement of intention or a guideline .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Meanwhile , Kottelawala has insisted that he would not talk to anybody in the LTTE except its supreme leader Velupillai Prabhakaran .</ENAMEX>
But it is well known that Prabhakaran does not participate in talks for a long time .
The last time Prabhakaran talked to any leader was in 1987 , when he met then Indian prime minister Rajiv Gandhi in New Delhi , but even that was only under duress .
He did not participate even in the Thimphu talks in the Bhutan capital held under India 's aegis when relations with India were relatively good .
On March 18 , 1998 the Interpol sent out an international alert for the arrest of Prabhakaran and four of his senior aides at Sri Lanka 's request .
Prabhakaran had exchanged letters with Sri Lankan presidents Premadasa and Chandrika Kumaratunga , but did not meet them .
He would never expose himself for both security and political reasons .
Sri Lanka 's peace prospects look dim as the peace process has been at a deadlocked for the lack of bipartisan consensus between the PA and the UNP and the LTTE 's intransigence .
However , in an address to mark the PA fifth anniversary in office on August 21 , President Kumaratunga made it clear the government was keen to end the war and implement the peace plan next year .
Kumaratunga urged the UNP , the LTTE and the leftist JVP or People 's Liberation Front to support her efforts .
Hameed is also hopeful that the businessmen 's initiative would not collapse as the search for peace was bound to go on .
