COLOMBO , October 8 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The Colombo - Jaffna Highway is open for traffic after 13 years of closure and there is a free flow of traffic between the north and south following the rout of the rebels of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam on the Jaffna Peninsula in May and Kilinochchi Town in September .
The opening of the highway is a heavy blow to the LTTE , which as a result is finding itself in an increasing difficult situation , analysts here said .
Kilinochchi Town , which was used by the rebels as their headquarters after they recaptured Jaffna city , is on a main supply route for the Sri Lanka government in despatching food and provisions to the north .
The town had been held by the rebels , who blocked vehicle traffic on the highway and levied a toll on individuals who wanted to travel either way .
Following their rout , the rebels , who have been fighting for an separate Tamil state in the north and east of the country , have taken to the neighboring Wanni jungles where they have hastily constructed huts and sheds mainly to treat their injured , according to military sources .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">LTTE leader Velupillai Prabhakaran and the other leaders are reportedly in a jungle hideout at Mullaitivu District , near the military camp which they overran in August .</ENAMEX>
The military claims that now only Mullaitivu has to be re-taken to be in total control of North Sri Lanka .
It also claims that in the east too the strength of the rebels has been seriously weakened following the summoning of their cadres from the east to help the beleaguered Tigers in the Kilinochchi battle .
Deputy Defense Minister Anuruddha Ratwatte confirms this by saying the LTTE has been defeated in the north and though there may be temporary setbacks in the east , government troops could take full control there too within a short time .
While the government is taking steps to rehabilitate the civilian refugees both in Jaffna and at Kilinochchi , the Tigers are forcing them to flee to India to sour relations between the two countries .
They are even pumping money into this operation to smuggle refugees across the Palk Straits so as to create an international issue , the sources pointed out .
Already 2,500 refugees are reported to have been transported recently by the LTTE to southern India .
However , the Sri Lankan government , mainly through the endeavors of Foreign Minister Lakshman Kadiragamar , has been able to obtain much international support in the drive against the Tigers , the sources said .
At a recent U.N. conference , the minister appealed to the international community to help curb terrorism and sought the support of his counterparts in an effort to draw world attention to this problem and evoke international support .
India has agreed to take steps to stem the flow of refugees and in a preventive move , naval surveillance has been stepped up by both countries .
The United States has pledged its fullest assistance and cooperation to `` counter the scourge of terrorism perpetrated by the LTTE and those who support it by fund raising on their behalf . ''
Britain has offered to mediate peace between the government and the LTTE .
However , the government 's insistence on the LTTE laying down arms before resuming negotiations and the LTTE 's refusal to do so as a basis for dialogue may make international mediation impossible .
Meanwhile , citizens in Jaffna have urged the government not to allow the LTTE to administer the Jaffna Peninsula .
They have listed the hardships and extortion they experienced in the past 13 years and urged the government to act firmly against the LTTE rebels .
