COLOMBO , April 5 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- A Sri Lankan Tamil political party on Wednesday called on the international community to persuade the government to let the refugees trapped in northern Jaffna peninsula leave for safer areas as fighting is continuing between government troops and Tamil Tiger rebels .
`` More than 5,000 Tamil civilians , including children , remain trapped in Palai and Kilali areas for the last several days in the midst of the on-going military confrontation , '' the Tamil Eelam Liberation Organization -LRB- TELO -RRB- , a former Tamil militant group , said in a statement .
The TELO 's appeal was echoed by the separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam -LRB- LTTE -RRB- rebels who alleged that the Sri Lanka army was holding thousands of civilians as human shields in the northern battle zones .
`` Tamil civilians are trapped in the militarily occupied zones and have been prevented by the Sri Lankan army from moving to areas of safety and security , '' the LTTE said in statement sent from their office in London on Wednesday .
The LTTE said that the International Committee of the Red Cross -LRB- ICRC -RRB- and the United Nations High Commission for Refugees -LRB- UNHCR -RRB- delegations in Jaffna were failing in their duty to protect civilians .
Meanwhile , heavy fighting broke out again on Wednesday in Jaffna 's southern sector between the LTTE rebels and government troops with both sides bombarding each other 's positions with heavy volumes of mortar and artillery fire since morning .
The clandestine Voice of Tigers -LRB- VoT -RRB- radio said that the guerrillas were continuing Operation Unceasing Waves III by pushing further into the Jaffna peninsula and that LTTE 's Special Border Force and the Border Force are playing a key role in the offensive .
Sri Lanka 's Jaffna peninsula has seen bloody battles since last week as LTTE rebels try to retake their former stronghold , which they lost in 1996 .
Hundreds of rebels and soldiers have been killed or wounded in the fighting .
International aid officials said on Wednesday they had no access to civilians in the area , who they feared were facing shortages of food and medicine .
They said there were still some 1,300 families stuck in the Kilali and Palai .
The LTTE rebels , fighting for a separate homeland for minority Tamils in Sri Lanka 's north and east since 1983 , have vowed to take back Jaffna , which might help the LTTE negotiate from a position of strength if and when peace talks with the government began .
The government is discussing constitutional reform proposals with the main opposition United National Party that aims to end the conflict by devolving more powers to regional councils , including one that would be administered by Tamils .
