COLOMBO , May 21 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The Sri Lankan government has canvassed the support of friendly countries against moves for a U. N. resolution on the island country 's escalating internal conflict between government troops and Tamil Tiger rebels , The Sunday Times here .
`` We do not want ourselves turned into another mess like Bosnia or Sierra Leone through U.N. resolutions , '' a spokesman for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was quoted by the newspaper as saying .
Russia and China , two U.N. Security Council permanent members with veto power , had responded positively to Sri Lanka 's concerns , the spokesman said , adding that the government would `` go to the ends of the world '' to fight `` tooth and nail '' moves to introduce any U.N. resolution on Sri Lanka .
The government 's tough stand came after the European Parliament passed a resolution in Brussels Friday calling on `` the European Union member states in the U.N. Security Council to bring the situation before the U.N. as a matter of urgency . ''
The European resolution , to be forwarded to the U.N. Security Council , the U.N. secretary general and the secretary general of the Commonwealth , also welcomed the efforts of the Norwegian government and the Indian government to bring about an acceptable , peaceful political solution and urges the Commonwealth to use its good offices for high-level mediation in the Sri Lanka crisis .
Sri Lanka has been plagued by a 17-year civil war between government troops and Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam -LRB- LTTE -RRB- rebels who are fighting for a separate state for minority Tamils in the country 's north and east .
In recent weeks , the civil war has been escalating as LTTE rebels are engaged in a ferocious assault in a bid to retake their former stronghold of Jaffna which they lost to government troops in 1995 .
Unconfirmed reports said Britain is interested in raising the Sri Lankan issue at the Security Council .
However , Sri Lankan Foreign Minister Lakshman Kadirgamar said last week that Sri Lanka was dead against any form of U.N. intervention .
