GROZNY , Russia
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- While Russian jets bombed Chechnya again today , officials said Islamic militants might stage new attacks in Russia by slipping across the border among refugees fleeing the airstrikes .
Some 60,000 people have abandoned their homes since Russian jets began bombing the Chechen capital of Grozny and nearby regions a week ago .
The airstrikes today again hit communications centers , ammunition depots , and oil and industrial facilities , the Russian Defense Ministry said .
Chechen officials claimed 10 people were killed during today 's raids .
The Russian Defense Ministry said all the casualties were militants .
The Chechens say 300 civilians have died in strikes so far .
Moscow says the strikes are aimed against Chechnya -based Islamic rebels who twice invaded the neighboring republic of Dagestan in August and September .
The militants have also been blamed for a series of apartment explosions in Russia that killed some 300 people in recent weeks .
The raids have fueled fears that Moscow is planning a major ground operation in Chechnya , which could mean a repeat of the disastrous 1994-96 war with Chechen separatists .
Officials have denied they plan to send in ground troops .
But the Interfax news agency today quoted an unidentified Defense Ministry source as saying preparations for a ground operation have entered their final stage .
Before the airstrikes began , Russia said up to 2,000 militants were gathered along the border of Dagestan in preparation for a new invasion .
Russian commanders said the militants ' supply lines and bases must be destroyed .
Russian Defense Ministry spokesman Sergei Pryganov said today that around 2,000 refugees have fled east from Chechnya toward Dagestan .
That has made the situation at the border chaotic , he said , because the refugees were trying to enter Dagestan at crossings where the militants were gathered .
The guerrillas could try to infiltrate the border posing as refugees , he said .
Authorities were letting some refugees across , but only after strict document checks .
The refugees were being accommodated in tent camps in Dagestan , Pryganov said .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Most of those fleeing Chechnya have fled west into the neighboring Russian region of Ingushetia , and several regional leaders have warned of an impending humanitarian crisis because of the refugee influx</ENAMEX> .
Meanwhile , Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin urged negotiations with Chechnya , saying the republic 's leaders must `` show a constructive approach and the willingness to free their territory of bandit gangs , '' Interfax reported .
