GROZNY , Russia
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- As Western leaders appealed for a peaceful solution to the fighting in Chechnya , Russia unleashed a new wave of air and artillery strikes in the breakaway republic .
Jets continued bombing the capital , Grozny , and Chechnya 's second-largest city , Gudermes , as well as several villages .
Russian troops had Gudermes cut off from the north and east , but they believed there were still about 200 militants in the city , Defense Ministry spokesman Gennady Alyokhin said .
Casualty figures were not available for the latest fighting .
The British Embassy said today it was awaiting word from Russian officials on the fate of two Western journalists who were arrested Thursday along the border between Chechnya and the Russian region of Ingushetia .
Times of London reporter Anthony Lloyd of Britain and free-lance photographer Tyler Hicks , a U.S. citizen , were arrested by Russian police as they tried to cross the border .
The ITAR - Tass news agency said they were arrested for not having press accreditation cards .
In Moscow , U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott urged Russia today to turn from military force to dialogue in Chechnya and to avoid civilian casualties .
In talks with Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov , Talbott said he had conveyed President Clinton 's concern about the situation .
`` We understand that Russia has come up against a very dangerous threat of extremism and terrorism , '' which gives Russia the `` right and duty to protect the state and its citizens , '' Talbott said , according to Russian news reports .
At the same time , he added , the United States hopes that Russia will `` turn to political levers as soon as possible . ''
Russian presidential spokesman Dmitry Yakushkin told reporters today that the United States and Russia were involved in a `` normal dialogue '' over Chechnya .
However , he said no one has the right to interfere in Russia 's internal affairs , since `` we are struggling against the sources of terrorism on Russian territory , '' the Interfax news agency reported .
Russian officials have said they would not back down in their effort to crush the breakaway republic 's Islamic militants .
The militants twice invaded Russia this summer and have been blamed for four deadly apartment bombings , two in Moscow and two in southern Russia , that killed several hundred people .
Meanwhile , two Russian hostages --one held for more than a year -- were released from captivity in Chechnya and taken to the neighboring republic of Dagestan , after an operation by Russia 's Interior Ministry and Chechen secret services , ITAR - Tass said .
It said that the army private , Imamshamil Abdulkhalilov , had been kidnapped Sept. 10 , 1998 while on leave in Dagestan .
The other man , a 27-year -old native of the Saratov region in central Russia named Engali Yenaliyev , was taken hostage on March 18 .
About 1,300 people have been kidnapped in and around Chechnya over the past three years by gangs seeking ransom .
More than 700 of the hostages have been freed .
The Russian military 's movements in recent days suggest it is trying to retake control of the republic , which has had de facto independence since a 1994-96 war .
`` We have come to never go away , '' Defense Minister Igor Sergeyev said Thursday during a visit to troops in Chechnya , the ITAR - Tass news agency reported .
Russian Col. Gen. Valery Manilov , first deputy chief-of-staff of the armed forces , said from New York that `` any talks with terrorists and killers are out of the question , '' according to ITAR - Tass .
Manilov said there were no plans for the moment to assault the capital , in an effort to avoid civilian casualties .
Unlike the 1994-96 Chechen war , Russia 's current campaign has widespread popular support in Russia .
Chechen President Aslan Maskhadov said his calls for peace talks with Russian President Boris Yeltsin are going nowhere .
`` All my proposals to meet with Yeltsin are being ignored .
My words never reach the president , '' he said Thursday .
Maskhadov said 3,265 Chechens had been killed and more than 5,000 others wounded since Sept. 5 , when Russia began launching airstrikes on Chechnya .
He said Russian troops had destroyed 60 villages and Chechnya faced a humanitarian crisis .
Col. Gen. Manilov said 1,500 Chechen rebels and 212 Russian soldiers have been killed since the offensive began .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Thousands of Chechens have fled toward Ingushetia to escape the fighting</ENAMEX> .
Next week , a U.N. mission will travel to the region to assess the refugees ' needs , the United Nations said .
