GROZNY , Russia
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Chechnya 's leader declared martial law in a bid to halt advancing Russian troops , who again pounded the rebel republic with airstrikes and artillery today .
The Russians say they 've seized the northern third of Chechnya since entering the lawless territory last week in an effort to seal it off from the rest of Russia .
The Russians today were fortifying positions on the northern bank of the Terek River , including a stronghold near the village of Chervlyonnaya , 15 miles northeast of Grozny .
The river cuts across northern Chechnya , and the Russian media has said Russian troops may halt their incursion along this line .
The plains of northern Chechnya are thinly populated and should be relatively easy for the Russian ground forces to defend with their tanks and big artillery guns .
But if the Russians push south across the river and toward the capital , the wooded , hilly terrain would begin to favor the Chechen fighters , who are much more effective at guerrilla raids than pitched battles .
Russian Defense Minister Igor Sergeyev said the Russian forces were facing only `` pockets of resistance '' and may cross the river .
`` Everything will depend on the situation , '' he said .
The Russians rained artillery shells on northwest Chechnya and carried out bombing raids in eastern Chechnya , the Interfax news agency reported , citing Chechen officials .
There was no immediate word on casualties .
Chechen President Aslan Maskhadov on Tuesday night declared martial law , which took effect today `` to protect the country 's sovereignty and territorial integrity . ''
The economy will be placed on war footing , and Chechnya 's Muslim clerics were expected to call for a `` holy war '' against Russia , Chechnya 's Deputy Prime Minister Kazbek Makhashev told the Interfax news agency .
The streets of Grozny were largely deserted today .
Some food markets were operating , but most men on the streets were in military uniforms .
The wing of a Russian Su -25 war plane that was shot down Monday was placed on a pedestal in the central square in Grozny .
The plane was one of two that the Chechen fighters have brought down in recent days .
`` I am happy that this aircraft was shot down , '' said a woman who gave her name only as Rosa .
`` It means the Russians ca n't bomb us with impunity . ''
The Russians have been bombing Chechnya for several weeks .
Many of the attacks have been concentrated in and around Grozny , destroying oil refineries , brick yards and suspected bases belonging to Chechen militants .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The raids have prompted at least 125,000 civilians to flee Chechnya , with most of them heading to the neighboring republic of Ingushetia .
The influx is straining resources in Ingushetia , an impoverished republic that had just over 300,000 people before the refugee flood began .
`` The local hospitals ... just cannot provide the sick refugees with medical aid , '' Ingushetia 's President Ruslan Aushev told Interfax .
`` Children sleep on the ground and have very few warm clothes </ENAMEX>. ''
Russian Deputy Prime Minister Valentina Matviyenko arrived in Ingushetia on Tuesday and said Russia could cope with the crisis without international aid .
But , she added , `` should international organizations express a wish to offer assistance , it would be wrong to turn it down . ''
Russia took military action after Chechen -based Muslim militants invaded the neighboring Russian republic of Dagestan in August and September seeking to create an Islamic state in southern Russia .
The militants have also been blamed for bombings in Russia last month that killed about 300 people .
Chechnya has effectively been independent since Russian troops withdrew at the end of a 1994-96 war , but warlords and criminal gangs have rendered the territory ungovernable .
