SLEPTSOVSKAYA , Russia
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Russian warplanes and ground troops on Saturday battered Chechnya 's southern mountains where thousands of rebels were entrenched , and the Russian military claimed to be strengthening its hold on strategic heights .
Since Russian forces claimed control of the breakaway republic 's capital , Grozny , after a rebel exodus early in February , the military has increasingly focused on the mountains , where up to 8,000 rebels are believed to be based among the rugged , snowy slopes .
But federal forces are continuing to face some resistance from rebel holdouts in Grozny , the army headquarters for the North Caucasus told the Interfax news agency .
According to the army , Russian forces have seized nearly all the commanding heights of the Argun and Vedeno gorges , which extend deep into the mountains and are believed to be important supply routes for the fighters .
Chechen rebels attacked a Russian guard post overnight on the border with Georgia , the only foreign country bordering Chechnya , the news agency ITAR - Tass reported , citing border guard officials .
There were no casualties among the guards , they said .
The rebels , although far outnumbered by Russian troops , are skilled in mounting hit-and-run attacks , especially in the mountains where they can quickly fade into the crags and fog .
Although Russia claims to control most of Chechnya after nearly five months of fighting , rebels this week ambushed two military trains and attacked federal units , demonstrating that they can still inflict bloody damage on Russian forces .
Russian warplanes , despite inclement weather , flew more than 70 combat missions over the past 24 hours , attacking rebel bases and camps in the two gorges , the military command said , according to Interfax .
The attacks wiped out 11 reinforced rebel positions , a communications center and an air-defense position , among other targets , the report said .
While Russian troops tried to put down the rebels remaining in Grozny , work was beginning to establish civilian `` self-rule '' administrations in the city 's districts , Interfax reported .
However , prospects were in doubt for a large-scale return of civilians to the city that once had a population of 400,000 .
Months of heavy bombing and shelling , followed by intense street-fighting , have left the city in ruins .
Many refugees say they do not plan to return , and some Russian officials say there is no money to restore the city .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">At the border with Ingushetia , two checkpoints that had been closed by Russian troops were reopened Saturday , and refugees were being allowed to move freely into and out of Ingushetia , Interfax said .
`` Passage is unrestricted for men and women alike , '' Ingush Interior Minister Khamzat Gutseriyev told Interfax .
The military said it had closed the checkpoints before to halt attempts by rebels to infiltrate Ingushetia in the guise of civilians</ENAMEX> .
Chechen President Aslan Maskhadov announced Friday that his forces were launching a guerrilla war throughout Chechnya , including areas that Russian forces have occupied for months , Russia 's NTV television reported .
Col. Gen. Valery Manilov , a high-ranking military official , dismissed Maskhadov 's announcement as a `` bluff . ''
Russia sent troops into Chechnya in September after Chechen -based Islamic militants twice invaded the neighboring region of Dagestan .
Authorities also claim Chechen rebels are tied to apartment bombings that killed about 300 people in Russia in September .
Manilov said Friday that 1,175 Russian servicemen had been killed and 3,544 injured since the start of the operation in Chechnya .
But many observers have said the toll appears to be far higher .
