SLEPTSOVSKAYA , Russia
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- The Russian military command claimed complete control Tuesday over a Chechen village nearly destroyed by weeks of battles -- but soldiers entrenched on the outskirts still told of shootings and nighttime raids by rebels .
The two-week battle for the southern village of Komsomolskoye has reduced nearly every house to ruins and highlighted the difficulty Russia will have trying to control Chechnya .
Over the past weeks and months , rebels have been moving and regrouping , occasionally slipping through Russian positions and seizing villages .
The militants then prove extremely hard to remove , withstanding waves of air raids and attacks .
The federal command said that final efforts to purge the rebels from Komsomolskoye ended Tuesday , and a Russian flag has been raised over the village .
But Russian troops were entrenched on the outskirts and told of nighttime movements by rebel groups , and attacks of sniper fire , according to footage shown on Russia 's NTV television station .
`` We are trying , we are applying all our strength , but this is a difficult process , '' Grigory Fomenko , a commander of Interior Ministry troops , told NTV .
`` We ca n't put soldiers holding hands all around the village , and surround the village like that , '' he said .
`` We ca n't stand in front of every house . ''
The federal command conceded there were still straggling rebels inside the Russian encirclement that surrounds Komsomolskoye , but the village itself is now safe , the Interfax news agency reported .
Russia 's presidential spokesman on Chechnya , Sergei Yastrzhembsky , said Tuesday that Moscow worried about new surprise attacks by rebels ahead of Sunday 's Russian presidential election , Interfax reported .
`` A strike in the back should be expected in Chechnya ahead of the presidential election , '' Yastrzhembsky said .
`` We must be ready for this . ''
The federal command said 500-600 rebels and 50 Russian soldiers had been killed during the fighting from Komsomolskoye , which saw the village 's entire population flee as their houses were bombed and shelled .
The casualty claims could not be confirmed .
According to Interfax , a military spokesman said scores of rebels surrendered in Komsomolskoye on Tuesday morning , a day after federal forces raised the Russian flag over the village .
The surrender came after acting President Vladimir Putin said he would consider talking with rebels in Chechnya , but only if they give up their weapons .
Also Tuesday , NTV reported that several Russian officers have been arrested on suspicion of selling Grad rockets to the Chechen rebels .
The report did not say when the arrests were made , but said the officers were seized with a shipment of 180 rockets .
The Defense and Interior Ministries had no immediate comment on the report .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The war has sent an estimated 250,000 Chechens fleeing their homes , with many of them ending up in refugee camps in the neighboring republic of Ingushetia , where they complain of poor conditions</ENAMEX> .
`` Every day we do not know what to expect .
We are nervous , '' said Adam Madayev , a refugee in the Sputnik camp near Sleptsovskaya .
The European Union announced Tuesday it would donate 3,300 tons of meat and 1,100 tons of rice to refugees and host families in Ingushetia .
Russian ground troops entered Chechnya in September , after rebels invaded the neighboring Russian region of Dagestan last summer .
Russia now controls most of Chechnya , but has n't been able to defeat rebels in the southern mountains .
Despite the arrests , rebels have said they will not quit fighting and have ambushed Russian troops far behind the front lines in recent weeks , inflicting heavy casualties .
