NAZRAN , Russia
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- The war in Chechnya has simmered down to isolated clashes , but rebels said Monday they were regrouping for a new offensive and top Russian commanders warned that violence will flare up again .
Also Monday , in a sign of growing concern among Russians about the war , a group of lawmakers said they were setting up an independent commission to investigate the situation in Chechnya , including human rights .
Russia has been under strong criticism from the West over the eight-month war and United Nations High Commissioner of Human Rights Mary Robinson this month urged formation of an independent commission .
Pavel Krasheninnikov , a member of parliament and commission initiator , told a news conference that the Chechen offensive has reached a deadlock and `` a military settlement is unlikely to succeed . ''
Chechen fighters have kept up their hit-and-run attacks on Russian forces in recent weeks , but the fierce battles that laid waste to the rebel republic have abated .
`` They can no longer fight the way they did three or four months ago , but they have carried out , are carrying out and will carry out terrorist acts , '' said a top Russian commander in Chechnya , Col. Gen. Gennady Troshev .
A rebel fighter , who only identified himself as Shirvani , said Monday the insurgents needed time to recover and regroup after the rough and bloody winter .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Shirvani came to Nazran in neighboring Ingushetia with 11 wounded militants for medical treatment .</ENAMEX>
He said the militants were planning `` a number of terrorist acts on the territory of Chechnya '' at the end of the month , but for the moment were concentrating on `` quick attacks '' on Russian checkpoints .
In the town of Gudermes , two Russian policemen were killed and three wounded Sunday when unknown gunmen opened fire on them as they raided an apartment where rebels were suspected of hiding out , the Interfax and ITAR - Tass news agencies reported .
The Russian military claimed that nearly a dozen rebels were killed and several taken prisoner during another battle in the southern Itum - Kale region , Interfax reported .
After moving into Chechnya in September , Russian troops seized about two-thirds of the republic in steady advances across the northern flatlands .
But the Russians have bogged down in the southern mountains , the last major area still under rebel control .
Moscow has indicated in recent weeks that it may be looking for a way out of the conflict .
The independent commission whose formation was announced Monday will investigate the events of the current war and of the 1994-6 Chechnya war , initiators said .
Putin , on a visit to London on Monday , said he only learned about the commission from media reports , but that he welcomed its creation .
