NAZRAN , Russia
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- A remote-controlled bomb exploded on the side of a highway in western Chechnya , injuring the son of a pro- Moscow Muslim cleric as he sped in his car along a highway , officials said Saturday .
Ramzan Kadyrov suffered shrapnel wounds in Friday 's explosion near the city of Gudermes , officials said .
His father -- Mufti Akhmad Alidkhadzhi Kadyrov -- has been linked to efforts to create a pro- Moscow administration in the southern , breakaway region .
The elder Kadyrov said the explosion was the work of `` the enemies of a peaceful solution to the conflict in Chechnya , '' the Interfax news agency reported .
Russian troops are trying to subdue Chechen guerrillas fighting for independence .
Russia , which lost control of Chechnya in a 1994-96 war , retook most of the republic after invading in September .
But President Vladimir Putin has said it could be 18 months or more before there are local elections .
Kadyrov , who enjoys good relations with Moscow , has been the target of several assassination attempts , which have killed six of his relatives , Interfax reported .
The rebel government dismissed Kadyrov last year as Chechnya 's top mufti , or religious judge and leader , after he met with Putin , who was then prime minister .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Rebel leaders called the meeting a betrayal .
Security was tight Saturday on the border between Chechnya and the neighboring region of Ingushetia , where Chechen rebels ambushed a Russian column on Thursday , killing 18 soldiers</ENAMEX> .
Guards at the Kavkaz checkpoint on the Chechen side of the border took up to an hour to inspect each car , and reconnaissance planes flew over the stretch of road where the column had been attacked .
Russian military officials and Ingushetia 's president , Ruslan Aushev , blamed each other for the attack , for which Chechen fighters apparently had slipped into Ingushetia to ambush the troops .
Chechen guerrillas have shown they can move through the region 's forests and ravines to attack Russian positions , despite Moscow 's claims that its forces have crushed most organized resistance .
Meanwhile Saturday , the ITAR - Tass news agency reported that Ingush authorities had arrested Chechen field commander Lechi Shavayev , who allegedly organized the 1988 kidnapping of Russia 's presidential envoy to Chechnya .
The envoy , Valentin Vlasov , was released after negotiations between Chechen rebels and Interior Ministry officials .
He spent six months in captivity .
Interfax also said that 19 rebels had been released from Russian detainment under an amnesty law , which says militants who surrender their weapons and are found to have committed no serious crimes can go free .
