NAZRAN , Russia
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Russian forces claimed victories Friday against bands of Chechen militants , after suspected rebel fighters killed 19 federal soldiers outside the breakaway republic , further eroding Russian assertions that organized resistance has been quashed .
The military said its forces staged two attacks that caused heavy rebel casualties by employing the same ambush-style tactics used repeatedly by the Chechens .
A federal reconnaissance unit surrounded a rebel band in densely wooded foothills near the southeastern village of Serzhen - Yurt on Thursday , the deputy commander of the Russian force in the region said on Russian television .
About 20 rebels and two Russian soldiers were killed in the fighting , in which soldiers sometimes battled hand-to-hand , said Col. Gen. Mikhail Labunets .
The military command claimed that another Russian unit attacked a rebel base at a sheep farm near Niki - Khita , killing 21 rebels and seizing weapons and ammunition , according to the Interfax news agency .
The casualty claims could not be confirmed .
Both sides tend to exaggerate enemy losses .
The Russian military , mostly poorly trained conscripts , has relied rarely on ambushes , instead conducting frontal assaults following heavy airstrikes and artillery barrages .
The rebels , however , are veteran guerrillas skilled at hit-and-run tactics .
Also Friday , a remote-controlled mine planted by rebels exploded and killed a Russian journalist , Alexander Yefremov , and two police officers .
All were riding in a jeep through a Russian -controlled region near the capital Grozny , the military said .
Another mine exploded on a passenger bus in Dzhaglari in eastern Chechnya , killing three civilians and wounding 19 , the military command said .
Russian infantry on Friday scoured the forests around the site of Thursday 's rebel ambush that killed 19 soldiers in the neighboring republic of Ingushetia , but the gunmen appeared to have slipped away .
It was the latest of several ambushes that have killed scores of soldiers and challenged government claims that the rebels are near defeat .
Officials traded blame Friday for the attack , and warned that the Chechens were preparing to expand their fight elsewhere in Russia .
The rebels made several raids outside Chechnya in a 1994-96 war , which ended with Russian troops being driven from the breakaway republic .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Several thousand civilians in Ingushetia , mostly somber older men , rallied Friday to condemn the attack and urge an end to the Chechnya war .
Tiny Ingushetia has taken in more than 200,000 refugees who have fled the fighting</ENAMEX> .
Meanwhile , Sergei Yastrzhembsky , the Kremlin 's chief spokesman on Chechnya , repeated earlier denials that Russia was contemplating negotiations with Chechen President Aslan Maskhadov .
`` Any contacts with Maskhadov 's people are unacceptable , '' Yastrzhembsky said in the southern Russian city of Vladikavkaz .
The Kremlin has indicated in recent weeks that it is looking for a political solution to the conflict , but demands that the rebels surrender their weapons and release all Russian hostages as a first step .
Russian troops re-entered the rebellious republic in September after Chechnya -based militants seized several villages in the neighboring Russian region of Dagestan .
