NAZRAN , Russia
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Rebels blew up a police car in Chechnya 's capital , killing two civilians as the province prepared to elect a deputy to parliament , the military said Thursday .
Four Russian police officers were wounded in the attack Wednesday evening in Grozny , the military command was quoted by Interfax as saying .
The car had been filled with explosives .
The police had been checking polling stations and sweeping Grozny for rebels as part of heightened security ahead of Sunday 's elections for a member of Russia 's parliament from Chechnya , Interfax said .
Federal forces have been unable to prevent rebels from staging attacks and planting mines deep in Russian -controlled territory in recent days .
Gunmen fired at the home of one of the 13 parliament candidates Wednesday , though no casualties were reported .
Interior Minister Vladimir Rushailo warned that the rebels , who insist Chechnya is not part of Russia , were planning attacks to disrupt the election .
`` The situation in Chechnya is complicated but controllable , '' Rushailo said in Grozny .
Early voting has already started in some areas , including those where Russian troops are based .
Parliamentary elections took place in the rest of Russia last December , when federal forces and rebels were engaged in fierce fighting .
Even though Russia still does n't control all of Chechnya , officials had promised a legislator would be elected this summer .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Refugees in neighboring Ingushetia , who are also eligible to vote from their camps , know almost nothing about the elections .</ENAMEX>
`` What election ?
Putin was elected .
What else do they want from us ? '' asked 50-year -old Malika Sutisheva , referring to Russian President Vladimir Putin .
`` It is insulting for Chechnya and its citizens .
When one-third of Chechens live beyond the territory of Chechnya , it is absurd to elect a parliament deputy from it , '' said Ruslan Salbiyev , 32 .
Twenty -two servicemen were killed in Chechnya over the past week and 79 wounded , the Defense Ministry said Thursday .
That brings the official count of Russians killed since the start of fighting in the region to 2,625 , though independent observers say the toll is much higher .
Russian fighter planes and helicopter gunships flew 42 missions over the past 24 hours , targeting the Vedeno gorge that cuts through the mountains in southeast Chechnya , the military said Thursday .
Russian troops withdrew from Chechnya in defeat at the end of a 1994-96 war , then moved back in last September to end the republic 's de facto independence .
The campaign came after cross-border raids by Islamic militants based in Chechnya last August and subsequent bombings in Russia that Moscow blamed on the rebels .
