NAZRAN , Russia
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Russian warplanes bombed a Chechen region along the border with Georgia on Tuesday , seeking to destroy rebel units that attacked several border posts overnight , an official said .
Security was tightened in regions bordering the breakaway republic following a bombing in a busy Moscow square that killed at least seven people Tuesday evening .
No one claimed responsibility for the blast but Russian officials ' suspicions fell on Chechen rebels .
At least nine Russian checkpoints came under rebel fire during the night in other parts of Chechnya , including several posts in the capital Grozny .
Several soldiers were killed and wounded in a shootout in the Grozny district of Chernorechye , said an official .
During the nighttime battle on the border , Russian border guards were forced to call for artillery support to repel the insurgents , and intense shelling of the mountainous Itum - Kale district continued until the morning , said an official in Chechnya 's pro- Moscow administration .
At daybreak , Russian warplanes lifted off to attack suspected rebel positions and to destroy mountain paths used by insurgents , said the official , speaking on condition of anonymity .
There was no word on casualties on either side .
Russian authorities have repeatedly claimed that rebels are sneaking into Georgia -- the only foreign country that borders Chechnya -- to rest and to fetch weapons and reinforcements .
Georgia denies aiding the rebels .
Russian artillery also shelled the southern Kurchaloi and Shali districts , and the Nozhai - Yurt region in the east , where thick forests and ragged mountains provide cover for small , mobile groups of rebels .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Russian aircraft also pounded rebel targets just west of Chechnya in the Russian republic of Ingushetia</ENAMEX> .
The military command said they were targeting militants who shot at a Russian helicopter and wounded a paratrooper , ITAR - Tass said .
Russian military officials have repeatedly claimed that the insurgents are on the verge of defeat , and that rebel fighters are defecting to the federal side .
However , the rebels stage daily attacks on federal forces throughout the republic , shattering Russian claims to control any part of Chechnya .
Meanwhile , the Russian military claimed that rebel field commander Arbi Barayev executed three of his fighters , whom he accused of stealing $ 500,000 from his home , the ITAR - Tass news agency reported .
The claim could not be independently verified .
