NAZRAN , Russia
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Chechen rebels were retreating in the face of the Russian offensive in southern Chechnya on Thursday and were regrouping deeper in the mountains , Russian officials said .
Russian warplanes and artillery continued to batter rebel bases , striking deep in the mountains to uproot separatist fighters from their hideouts .
Presidential aide Sergei Yastrzhembsky said the rebels left the villages of Duba - Yurt , at the entrance of the Argun gorge , and had retreated from separatist bases in the towns of Khatuni and Makhety , the Interfax news agency reported .
The rebels were moving southward , deeper into the Argun and Vedeno gorges , where they were trying to build new defense positions , Yastrzhembsky said .
Most of the 63 combat missions by federal warplanes and helicopter gunships carried out in the past 24 hours targeted those gorges , which cut through the mountains to the Georgian border .
Russian troops have been slow to move high into the mountains and directly confront the estimated 8,000 rebel fighters based there .
Instead , the military prefers to weaken the rebels by incessant shelling and air attacks ahead of what Kremlin officials are describing as a decisive offensive .
Defense Minister Igor Sergeyev said in Moscow that Russian troops in Chechnya are employing new tactics of `` remote war , which is advantageous for us and extremely disadvantageous for the bandits , '' Interfax reported .
Meanwhile , military officials confirmed plans to seal off Chechnya 's ruined capital Grozny starting Friday , the Interfax news agency reported .
Yastrzhembsky said army commanders cannot allow Grozny residents to return because of fears that rebels will sneak into the city in civilian disguise .
He said 300 rebels are still hiding in Grozny .
He said no date had been set to reopen the city because some 500 sappers needed time to finish defusing a large number of mines left in abandoned buildings .
The number of civilians remaining in the city is unclear , though they are estimated to number in the thousands .
Some 250,000 Chechens fled the fighting that began last fall , and many have since returned to areas in Russian -controlled areas of the region .
But few see any sense in coming back to the ruins of Grozny .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">In the neighboring republic of Ingushetia , Russian security services have stepped up security at the Sleptsovskaya airport following an alleged rebel threat to hijack a Russian airplane , Interfax reported</ENAMEX> .
Chechnya has had de-facto independence since the end of Moscow 's botched 1994-96 campaign there .
Last year , Chechnya -based Islamic militants tried to expand their zone of control and invaded the neighboring region of Dagestan .
Russian authorities also blame the militants for killing about 300 Russians in a series of apartment house bombings last fall , and say the offensive is aimed at combating terrorists responsible for such attacks .
