SLEPTSOVSKAYA , Russia
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- His face and uniform black with grime , the Russian soldier smiles gently as his armored personnel carrier rumbles out of Chechnya after months of fighting an enemy he never once saw .
Sgt. Igor Vlasov , 20 , can barely believe he survived a four-month combat tour in the rebel republic .
Slumping from fatigue on the edge of the carrier , he muses about his time in Chechnya , of days filled with boredom and nights with chest-squeezing fear of the next surprise attack .
Then , in two brief sentences , he sums up Russia 's dilemma , a year after the army went to war in Chechnya again : `` It is necessary to finish the war , but I do not know how .
We cannot leave it and we cannot stay there anymore . ''
Using guerrilla tactics since Russian troops attacked last Sept. 30 , the insurgents have fought the army to a standstill and show no sign of giving up the fight for independence , bleeding the Russians with daily hit-and-run attacks .
The military admits to casualties of about 2,700 dead and 9,000 wounded -- a figure that soldiers ' rights groups say is probably half the real total .
There are no figures for Chechen losses , although aid organizations say they number many thousands .
After two major wars in the past decade , most of Chechnya is devastated .
Very few buildings are undamaged , and there is almost no work to be had .
Thousands of Chechens live in refugee camps in surrounding regions .
`` I am so tired of Chechen faces .
In every look , you can see and feel hatred , '' Vlasov says .
`` They will always hate us .
Chechnya should have been fenced away and completely isolated . ''
His unit commander , Lt. Anatoly Sebrin , 24 , ca n't say how many of his men were killed or wounded .
Trying to remember the names of the dead , he blurts out his hatred for all Chechens : `` Those vermin , we need to finish with them . ''
`` In the daytime they would smile at you and at night they shoot you in the back .
It is impossible to pacify them , '' he says .
Like the Russian soldiers , Aisha Atabayeva , 56 , says she does n't think the war will ever end .
Every week , she goes from the Chechen capital , Grozny , to the neighboring Russian region of Ingushetia to buy food and see her two sons in a refugee camp .
Both are in the 20s and fear they would be shot by the army as rebels if they were in Chechnya , she says .
`` No one believes there will be peace , '' she says .
While the Russian military urges Chechens to return home , promising they will be safe , most of the traffic is in the other direction as more civilians seek to escape the fighting .
Any adult Chechen is a legitimate target to the Russian soldiers , they say .
`` The federals have somehow become completely savage , '' says Arbi Dinayev , who fled in mid- September .
`` You 're scared to go into the forest to chop wood ... if you come across a soldier , he can shoot you .
And then they say they killed a rebel . ''
Although the army claims to control most of Chechnya , civilians say there is no safe place because there is no front line .
The rebels strike the Russians anywhere and the military randomly bombs and shells areas and villages where it thinks insurgents are hiding .
Most of the Russian soldiers are frightened , homesick conscripts who received almost no training and barely know how to fire their weapons .
They are little match for the experienced guerrillas willing to die for their dream of an independent Chechnya .
Moscow sent troops back into Chechnya after rebels attacked neighboring Dagestan and a series of bombings in Russia that killed some 300 people .
The rebels denied any involvement in the bombings , but the republic had become a haven for kidnappers and bandits since the Russians were driven out in 1996 during an earlier war .
The rebels have their own problems , including rivalries between commanders and shortages of arms and supplies .
Aslan Maskhadov , who was elected Chechnya 's president in 1996 , heads the republic 's nominal government hiding in the southern mountains .
Maskhadov 's appeals for talks have been rejected by Moscow , although there have been unofficial contacts .
Russian President Vladimir Putin insists the rebels surrender and Chechnya remain a part of Russia .
So the war goes on .
`` The majority of Chechens hate us , even those who collaborate with us , '' says Andrei Bezugly , a Russian sergeant .
