ALKHAN - KALA , Russia
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Going after rebels who broke out of the Chechen capital , Russian forces bombed and shelled Chechnya 's western villages Saturday in an assault residents said was largely causing civilian casualties .
Militants say many of the 3,000 rebels who have filtered through the Russian blockade of Grozny since Monday are moving south , toward the breakaway republic 's rugged mountains , where thousands of their comrades are concentrated .
However , some of the injured and exhausted rebels stayed behind in muddy , rubble-strewn villages in western Chechnya , stumbling into civilians ' homes and saying they needed to rest , residents said .
Russian forces tried to close in on the scattered groups , surrounding some villages with convoys and hammering them with shells and bombs .
Fierce air and artillery attacks hit the villages of Zakan - Yurt , Lermontovo , Katyr - Yurt , Valerik and Gekhi on Saturday , Chechen field commander Akhmed Basnukayev said .
The Russian military claimed Saturday that more than 600 rebels were still holed up in Zakan - Yurt , Alkhan - Yurt and Alkhan - Kala .
But refugees from the villages said most rebels had already broken through Russian lines and fled , and that only injured fighters remained .
Russian troops who entered the village of Samashki on Friday after an intense round of bombing and shelling found streets littered with the bodies of dead civilians , said a refugee from there , Aset Gairbiyeva .
Soldiers loaded the bodies on trucks and carried them away , she said .
The few rebels still hiding in the embattled villages did not return the Russians ' fire , residents said .
The Russian military said larger groups of rebels were still roaming western Chechnya and clashing with federal troops .
The military said up to 1,000 rebels attacked Russian troops near Katyr - Yurt on Saturday , killing three officers , injuring six , and forcing the rest to flee , according to Russian news reports .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The Russian command also said militants tried to break into the Russian region of Ingushetia on Chechnya 's western border</ENAMEX> .
The reports could not be independently confirmed .
Only small groups of rebels remained in Grozny .
Russian artillery fired at the city at long intervals Saturday -- a sharp contrast to the relentless shelling of previous days .
Russian troops were advancing further into the city Saturday , but despite the constant rattle of automatic rifles , Russian commanders conceded there was no major rebel resistance .
Mined buildings were the main obstacle to the Russian advance .
The rebels insist their retreat from Grozny strengthened their position by freeing them from the Russian blockade and allowing them more mobility to wage a guerrilla war .
The Russians claim that the rebels ' exodus , and the death of several Chechen commanders in a minefield , signals that federal forces now have the upper hand .
The deputy chief of the Russian General Staff , Col. Gen. Valery Manilov , said on Russia 's NTV television Saturday that as soon as federal troops seize Grozny , the main Russian forces will head to Chechnya 's southern mountains .
Russian airplanes were dropping fliers over the mountains Saturday , urging the militants to surrender , Interfax reported .
Russian troops entered Chechnya in September after an invasion by Chechen -based militants into the neighboring Russian republic of Dagestan , and deadly apartment bombings elsewhere in Russia that were blamed on Chechens .
