GUDERMES , Russia
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Chechen fighters fiercely resisted attempts by Russian forces to take a strategic square in the rebel capital Grozny on Tuesday , attacking from the front and the rear to stymie the Russians ' drive .
Russian troops returning to Gudermes from Grozny Thursday evening said federal forces were still at least 400 yards from Minutka Square , which has been under siege for several days .
The square is near a Russian -held bridge that crosses the Sunzha River , which runs through Grozny .
If captured , it could give Russian forces leverage to move into downtown Grozny .
Capturing the capital would be the war 's biggest political prize .
As Russian aircraft and artillery continued their attacks in the breakaway province 's steep southern mountains , where an estimated 6,000 rebels are based , a prominent international human rights group on Tuesday criticized Russia 's offensive .
The Council of Europe , the continent 's highest human rights organization , said it would debate on Thursday whether to suspend Russia over allegations its forces have committed atrocities in Chechnya .
Exclusion from the body would mark a serious setback to Russia 's post- Communist attempts to integrate with the rest of Europe , and could severely embarrass acting President Vladimir Putin .
While Council members said Russia was guilty of indiscriminate bombings , detaining innocent people and restricting refugees ' freedom of movement , Russian officials argued that Chechen rebels had committed far more serious violations than federal troops .
A representative of the Federal Security Service noted that the rebels had kidnapped 500 to 800 people , severing the fingers of some of their hostages .
`` Human rights are not for one group of people and not another , '' said Alexander Kazdanovich .
`` You cannot be selective . ''
Russian ground forces moved into Chechnya in September and took much of the republic in a steady drive .
But they have faced heavy resistance in their efforts to take Grozny , which began Dec. 25 .
Rebels in the city , numbering at about 2,500 , fire from the capital 's wrecked buildings and launch hit-and-run attacks .
Aslanbek Ismailov , the rebel commander in Grozny , said that in some districts of the Chechen capital his fighters have switched from trying to hold on to fixed positions to striking Russian troops from the rear .
The Russian soldiers in Gudermes described this strategy as the `` roach tactic , '' saying rebels pretend to retreat , hide somewhere , and circle back .
The Russians claim to control most of Grozny , although troops are often taking city blocks by day only to abandon them at night in fear of rebel ambushes .
Despite claims of steady progress , the Russians still appear far from occupying the city or defeating the rebel garrison after months of fighting .
The Russian air force sharply increased its airstrikes against rebels .
More than 30 fortified rebel emplacements , two mobile communication centers , one training camp , four air defense installations and seven mortar crews were destroyed , and 100 rebels were killed , the military claimed Tuesday .
Russian aircraft continued to concentrate their fire on the rebel-held Argun and Vedeno gorges .
The Russians have been bombing the area for two weeks , trying to dislodge the militants from their refuges on the slopes of the gorges .
The gorges are key corridors through the mountains that shelter rebels and from which they can mount guerrilla attacks on the Russians .
The Russians believe that rebel supplies are also coming through the gorges , some of them from Georgia , the only foreign country that borders on Chechnya .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">An estimated 250,000 refugees have fled the fighting in Chechnya .
U.N. refugee officials said the flow in recent days has been especially high , with 2,000 to 2,500 Chechens crossing into the neighboring republic of Ingushetia daily</ENAMEX> .
Concern over diseases , especially tuberculosis , among the refugees is mounting , said Kris Janowski , a spokesman for the U.N. refugee agency .
Russian troops entered breakaway Chechnya in September after Chechen -based militants stormed villages in the neighboring Russian region of Dagestan .
The rebels were also blamed for a series of deadly bombings of apartment houses in Moscow and two other cities in September .
However , Russian Federal Security Service spokesman Alexander Zdanovich said Tuesday that there was not a single ethnic Chechen among 14 people suspected as organizers of the blasts , although all suspects had been trained in Chechnya , the Interfax news agency reported .
Russian officials said 1,093 troops have died since the Chechnya ground operation began , Interfax reported .
Russia is widely believed to understate its losses .
Another 118 soldiers died in Dagestan after Chechen rebels invaded last summer , the report said .
