MOSCOW --
Tens of thousands of civilians fled Chechnya 's capital Grozny as Russian warplanes Friday pounded the breakaway region 's capital and the Kremlin vowed to wipe out militants it accuses of terrorizing Russia .
As Russia and Chechnya lurched towards a new full-scale war , waves of Russian jets fired rockets at factories , oil refineries , television stations , residential areas and a busy marketplace , killing at least 12 civilians and wounding 40 , according to reports from Grozny .
Friday 's strikes on Grozny , the heaviest since Russia 's bloody defeat in a 1994-1996 war with Chechnya , were accompanied by a stark warning : Turn over the Islamic fighters the Kremlin accuses Chechnya of harboring , or face massive retaliation and destruction .
`` We will pursue the terrorists everywhere , if it is in the airport , then in the airport , '' said Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin .
`` You will forgive me , but if we catch them in the toilet , we will rub them out in the outhouse . ''
Putin , speaking to reporters during a state visit to Kazakhstan , denied that Russia was hitting civilian targets and called the strikes a response to `` international terrorism . ''
But reports and footage from Grozny indicate that numerous houses and cars had been hit , along with a telephone station , and oil storage tanks that spewed black smoke into the sky .
The Russian Interfax news agency said Su -25 strike aircraft had also bombed a column of cars near the village of Samashki , killing at least eight people and injuring others .
The Russian bombing campaign began Thursday .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Russian television showed a line of some 5,000 vehicles jamming a road leading to the neighboring republic of Ingushetia to the West of Chechnya</ENAMEX> .
Other footage showed women weeping over a man 's body .
The Chechen government reported that 300,000 had fled the fighting and at least 12 deaths and 40 injuries in six waves of attacks from early morning to late Friday evening .
The refugee figures were impossible to confirm independently , but local journalist Said Asuyev insisted that the 12 people killed Friday were not fighters .
`` That I can guarantee 100 percent , '' Asuyev said by telephone from Grozny .
Some analysts in Moscow expressed concern that the attacks would provoke the rebels to retaliate with attacks on Russian cities .
But in a blunt assessment of Moscow 's strategy , sources close to the government said that this is exactly what the Kremlin wants to do .
`` Russians are sick of Chechens , '' said one source .
`` This is a provocation against the -LRB- Chechen -RRB- fighters to attack , to build support for even harsher measures . ''
Russia began launching air raids against Chechnya following a string of bombings of apartment buildings in Moscow and other Russian cities this month that have claimed more than 300 lives .
The Chechens say nearly as many civilians have died over the past week of air strikes .
The Russian government blames the blasts on Islamic militants led by Chechen renegade commander Shamil Basayev and a or Saudi -born commander who goes by the name Khattab .
The two commanders twice invaded Dagestan , the southern Russian republic east of Chechnya , in recent weeks , saying they wanted to unite the regions into a single Islamic state .
The Chechens have denied involvement in the bombings , but most Russian politicians , and mass media , wholly endorse the Kremlin 's view that it is time to crack down on Chechnya .
Last week , popular television commentator Sergei Dorenko called for `` carpet bombing '' of the breakaway region .
Moscow newspaper advocated using biological weapons , napalm or even tactical nuclear weapons .
So did speakers at a hearing on Chechnya in the Russian lower house of parliament , the Duma .
`` Russia no longer intends to capitulate to the Chechens , '' said the respected daily Kommersant Friday .
`` All conversations will be held the only way Chechnya understands , from a position of strength .
The Russain leaders have finally figured it out -- if you give shelter to terrorists , it 's up to you to face the consequences . ''
Because of the bombs in Russian cities , the public outcry that accompanied the start of the last war in Chechnya is absent so far .
Two thirds of Russia 's 145 million people live in high-rise apartments like the three buildings decimated in blasts this month .
`` At this point , no one cares if a thousand , ten thousand or a hundred thousand Chechens are killed , if it means the end of terrorism in Russia , '' said the source .
The Kremlin is putting high stakes on a victory .
Putin , whom President Boris N. Yeltsin has named as his successor , would see his popularity skyrocket before presidential elections next year .
The Russian military has been building up its forces along the Chechen border , but military analysts say the army probably is too weak to invade or sustain any serious ground conflict -- at least for now .
Russia 's withdrawal from Chechnya in 1996 , after tens of thousands of people died , left the republic in control of the rebels , although no country has recognized their claim of independence .
The Russian generals , many of whom believe they could have won the last war but for the meddling of Moscow politicians , have reportedly drawn up a plan for a full-scale invasion .
Taking a page from the US approach over Kosovo they once so bitterly denounced , Russian military and political leaders have been saying that Moscow will first use its superiority in the air to soften up the Chechens .
But the generals have not ruled out a ground campaign .
`` We cannot and do not have the right to rule out any form or means of action to fulfill the main mission of liquidating terrorist formations on Russian territory , including their bases , '' Col. Gen. Valery Manilov told a news conference this week .
Manilov is one of several generals said to be drawing up plans for an invasion of Chechnya .
Another , North Caucasus commander Gennady Troshin , said expressed confidence this week that `` this time , no political forces in Moscow will save the fighters from destruction . ''
Chechnya 's President Aslan Maskhadov , whose residence is located in one of the areas hit Friday , said the air strikes show `` that Russian aviation is not doing battle with terrorists but with the Chechen people . ''
Maskhadov , the rebels ' military commander in the past war who is now seen as a relative moderate in relations with Russia , appealed to Moscow to choose negotiations rather than force .
But Maskhadov has little control over the radical fighters operating from his territory , whom Russia blames for a wave of crime , abduction and murder that has spread around the region .
Chechnya 's self-styled foreign ministry has appealed to world parliaments and governments to `` stop the agression . ''
But analysts say that Chechnya , the site of brutal kidnappings and slayings of Western aid workers and journalists , has squandered much of the international sympathy its independence struggle once enjoyed .
Nor would Western governments , which chided Moscow for the brutality of the last campaign , criticize Russia too harshly .
For one thing , says Anatol Lieven , analyst at the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London , what Russia is doing in Chechnya looks too much like NATO 's bombing campaign against Yugoslavia for the West to protest too loud .
For another , the West believes the Russian claims that the Chechen fighters have been receiving aid from Islamic terrorist organizations -- which means Russia and the West have the same enemy .
`` That says the Russians can get away with a great deal , '' Lieven said .
`` Last time the Russians did n't go out to massacre Chechens .
This time the Russians would feel free to do anything . ''
-LRB- Globe correspondent Brian Whitmore contributed to this report . -RRB-
