MOSCOW --
Russia rushed reinforcements to its border with Chechnya Saturday , after several hundred gunmen occupied three villages on the Russian side of the border with the breakaway Caucasus region .
Russian news agencies said government artillery and helicopters had fired on as many as 600 militants of an Islamic group who had taken up positions around the mountain villages in the southern Russian republic of Dagestan , a mainly Muslim territory bordering Chechnya .
Tensions in Russia 's North Caucasus region have steadily grown in recent weeks , as Russian units guarding the border with Chechnya have come under increasingly deadly attacks from assailants operating out of the rebel territory .
The incursion Saturday into Dagestan marked the first time that the militants have tried to hold territory in Russia since the end of a 1994-1996 civil war that left tens of thousands of troops and civilians dead and Chechnya with de facto independence .
Russian public television said the armed intruders were commanded by the Chechen field commander Khattab , one of the leaders of an austere Islamic movement known as Wahhabism .
Russian officials say Wahhabism , while not widespread in Dagestan , has grown increasingly popular in the impoverished , mountainous regions of the republic .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">The Interfax news agency quoted a Russian police official as saying another commander was involved : Chechen war hero Shamil Basayev , who has openly called for uniting Chechnya with two neighboring Russian regions with large Muslim populations , Dagestan to the east and Ingushetia to the West .</ENAMEX>
A commentator for Russian Public Telelvision in Dagestan said the militants ' goal could be to take over Dagestan 's capital , the Caspian Sea port of Makhachkala , 60 miles east of the Chechen border .
On Friday , Russian news agencies reported a group of Wahhabists was plotting to turn part of Dagestan into an independent Islamic state .
This month , Khattab promised to launch a series of large-scale attacks on Russia .
Last week , three Russian officers were killed in a raid on a checkpoint on the Chechen border .
Like the other regions on Chechnya 's border , Dagestan officials say they do not have the troops or equipment to properly guard their frontier .
Murder is common , and hostage-taking for ransom has become a daily event .
Dagestan 's Security Council requested reinforcements from Moscow , as well as permission to call up and arm reservists .
Federal authorities dispatched 1,000 police , an Interior Ministry battalion , and a motorized rifle brigade to the region , Interfax reported .
Chechnya 's rebel government in Grozny , meanwhile , denied any involvement in the border crossing .
But that is not unusual .
The Grozny government has little control over field commanders like Khattab or Basayev , or put a stop to the border raids and kidnapping for ransom that has turned the North Caucasus into the most dangerous place in Russia .
The tension in the Caucasus has posed a challenge to Russia 's embattled Prime Minister Sergei Stepashin , who Saturday ordered Russia 's Defense and Interior Ministries to `` normalize the situation . ''
`` Bandits are bandits , '' Stepashin said in televised comments .
`` You have to deal with them in the appropriate way .
We have the forces and the means . ''
But Stepashin , who played a leading role in Russia 's disastrous campaign in Chechnya , seemed to back away from a full-scale military action .
`` Russia will not repeat its mistakes in the North Caucasus .
No more Russian soldiers will die there . ''
Stepashin is under pressure from President Boris N. Yeltsin to win back the support of regional leaders , many of whom have joined a bloc led by a Kremlin antagonist , Moscow Mayor Yury Luzhkov .
Some analysts say the Kremlin might use the situation in the Cacausus as an excuse to declare a state emergency , thereby canceling parliamentary and presidential elections and preventing Luzhkov from coming to power .
