MOSCOW --
Russian troops continued to move within a few miles of Grozny , the capital of Chechnya , on Tuesday , and a top federal military commander said the campaign had entered a new phrase that would last as long as needed to defeat guerrillas fighting the Russian forces .
Lt. Gen. Gennadi Troshev , a commander in the Chechen campaign , said in an interview published Tuesday that Russia 's military campaign had entered a second stage that could last `` three months or two years '' -- however long it takes to crush the guerrillas .
`` If you look at the map , it is clear that the ring of our ` sanitary zone ' is tightening up , '' he told the newspaper Moskovsky Komsomolets .
`` The ring will be gradually tightened until the whole territory is under the full control of federal forces . ''
Even with Russian troops poised on the edge of Grozny , it is still unclear whether they will attack the city itself .
Some military experts say a failure to take the city would leave Russian forces exposed , while others say another bloody battle for Grozny -- like one staged by Russian troops in 1994 -- could prove politically costly in a war that has had broad public support in Russia .
The Russians invaded Chechnya in 1994 to try to crush separatists , and withdrew in defeat 21 months later .
Russia renewed military action in recent weeks after Chechnya -based rebels invaded neighboring Dagestan and after a series of explosions in Moscow and other cities that the government attributes to the rebels .
Tuesday , Russian forces moved closer to the northwestern edge of Grozny , within sight of the city 's airport , as planes and artillery attacked guerrilla positions .
Fighting was also reported along the Chechen border with another neighboring republic , Ingushetia .
Last weekend , Russian forces blocked the border , cutting off an escape route for refugees fleeing Russian bombing attacks .
In Grozny , a Chechen commander said Tuesday that the fighting in the Tersky ridge about 7 miles from the airport was the `` fiercest '' since Russian troops crossed into Chechnya .
The Russian news agency Interfax reported that the shelling was so heavy that windowpanes in the city were rattling all day .
-LRB- BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- One Russian television report said reconnaissance teams had entered a district on the northern outskirts , but Chechen commanders said no Russian troops had entered the city .
-LRB- END OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- Russian commanders have said they will attack the city if necessary , but Troshev said that seizing Grozny was not a `` goal in itself . ''
-LRB- BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- `` It would be easier to go around it , '' he said , suggesting a plan that would cut off the city , which is being rapidly emptied of inhabitants .
The exodus picked up after bombing attacks Thursday , which struck a central market , among other targets , killing scores of people .
-LRB- END OPTIONAL TRIM -RRB- Troshev -- a veteran of Russia 's last war in Chechnya who was born in Grozny -- spoke emphatically about a recent decision to offer a $ 1 million bounty for the head of Shamil Basayev , the Chechen warlord accused by Russia of leading armed attacks in Dagestan in August and of organizing terrorist bombings that killed almost 300 people in three Russian cities in September .
`` Whoever brings it , gets the money , '' Troshev said .
`` It does n't matter who it is -- Chechens themselves , or our special forces .
It is necessary to destroy this bandit .
He has done too much harm to Russia and his own people . ''
A military spokesman said later that Troshev 's words should not be taken literally and that the bounty would be awarded for the capture of Basayev , who should be delivered alive and unharmed .
The spokesman also said the money would not come from the Russian government 's budget , but from `` patriotically minded businessmen . ''
The $ 1 million offer has a special resonance in Chechnya , which in recent years has been isolated by a wave of kidnappings staged by warlords , like Basayev , who have used ransom money to build up their power bases in the unruly region .
And in Moscow on Tuesday , the city 's police chief suggested that Russia 's Interior Ministry might consider a swap of prisoners with the Chechen guerrillas -- exchanging an official Chechen representative in Moscow who was arrested last week on a charge of illegal weapons possession for a senior Russian police official kidnapped last year in Chechnya .
With 100,000 Russian troops on Chechnya 's northern rim and around its perimeters , the military has signaled its readiness to sweep the region .
It is pursuing an estimated 25,000 to 40,000 guerrillas who , Moscow contends , have received support and reinforcements from international terrorist organizations .
But information about the fighting in Chechnya is scant because the Russian military closely guards access to its troops and because the threat of kidnapping dissuades reporters and observers from stationing themselves inside Chechnya .
The Russian military has said about 200 Russian soldiers and 2,000 guerrillas have been killed in the fighting to date .
Chechen commanders contend that Russian troops have suffered far greater losses .
Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin , whose popularity ratings have gone up since Russian troops moved into Chechnya , said Tuesday that the government was satisfied with the military 's performance so far .
`` The situation is developing according to plan , '' he said .
Troshev said that so far the government was not insisting on a quick end to the fighting .
`` If the operation were to be halted , then Chechen terrorism would again creep up around the country , '' he said .
And a hasty effort to achieve victory would also be a mistake , he said .
`` If troops are thrown into an assault in the mountains , '' he said , `` it would lead to big , and countless , losses . ''
