MOSCOW --
The flight of tens of thousands of Chechens from Moscow 's massive bombing campaign has raised a new fear : that the Kremlin 's push to wipe out Islamic rebels may create more problems that it solves along Russia 's volatile southern rim .
As Russian jets struck targets within Chechnya for a sixth straight day , officials in Ingushetia , another fragile territory in the Caucasus , said Tuesday they were unable to handle the estimated 60,000 refugees who have fled the violence so far .
Amid signs that Moscow plans to widen its campaign against Chechnya , the sheer number of terrified refugees pouring out of the breakaway region has also provoked concern that the bombs are falling much more indiscriminately than the Kremlin claims .
Moscow says it is targeting only sites being used by the Islamic militants whom it blames for two armed incursions in another strife-ridden Caucasus region , Dagestan , and a wave of bomb blasts that killed 300 in Moscow and other cities .
The Chechens say that civilian targets are being hit and claim heavy casualties .
Tuesday , human rights activist Sergei Kovalyov backed the Chechens ' claim , saying Russian strikes were hitting civilians indiscriminately and accusing Moscow of `` taking actions that ... inevitably lead to a resumption of war -- a war that so recently and so ingloriously ended . ''
Prime Minister Vladimir Putin has said that while Russia intends to destroy what it considers `` bandits '' and `` international terrorists '' operating out of Chechnya , the Kremlin also wants to avoid a repeat of its disastrous 1994-96 campaign , which failed to defeat the separatists and left tens of thousands of civilians dead .
But the military units Moscow massing on Chechnya 's border look more and more like a strike force for a possible ground offensive , and Russian politicians and military officers are taking an increasingly belligerent line toward the relatively moderate government of Chechen President Aslan Maskhadov .
Until recently , Russian officials have generally acknowledged that Maskhadov does not control the insurgents , led by field commanders Shamil Basayev and Khattab , who invaded Dagestan last month .
But Tuesday , Sergei Pryganov , a Defense Ministry spokesman based in the Russian republic of Dagestan , where Russia lost 250 men during a month-long battle with militants , said recent reconnaissance reports indicated Chechen officials were helping the militants prepare new attacks .
That statement was the latest in a series of signs that Moscow views Maskhadov 's separatist government and alleged terrorist bases as one and the same , a theory borne out by the targets in the bombing so far : oil refineries and storage sites , television facilities , a telephone exchange , cement and food processing factories , and the residential neighborhood where Maskhadov lives .
The Chechens say 300 people have died in Grozny alone .
Tuesday , eight people died when a schoolhouse outside of Grozny was hit .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Civilians started fleeing Grozny , the Chechen capital , after bombs began falling last week .
The only neighboring territory that has been willing to take large numbers of them has been Ingushetia , whose mainly Muslim population has ethnic and linguistic ties to the Chechens .
But authorities in Ingushetia , impoverished and already bursting with more than 20,000 refugees from previous conflicts in the region , say they been overwhelmed by the new arrivals .
`` We urgently need humanitarian aid -- temporary housing , warm clothes , and blankets -- because we are on the doorstep of winter , '' said Ingushetia 's president , Ruslan Aushev .
`` The republic is unable to cope with this problem alone . ''
Ingushetia briefly closed its border Sunday , but more have been allowed to enter</ENAMEX> .
Azamat Nalgiyev , a member of the Ingush parliament , said in a phone interview from the region that the line of cars at one border crossing was 3 miles long .
Russian Emergency Situations Minister Sergei Shoigu , who flew to Ingushetia , insisted `` the government will not allow a catastrophe . ''
Shoigu told Russian news agencies that 40 tons of aid , including tents , food , and blankets , would be flown there .
Shoigu also denied that Chechen civilians had been attacked .
The Russian military , taking a page from NATO 's recent operation over Yugoslavia , have gone out of their way to present their airstrikes as precision attacks with little collateral damage .
Generals have gone on television with `` before '' and `` after '' photographs of targets hit , and even released footage showing a rocket honing in on and destroying its target .
The footage implies a laser-guided `` smart '' bomb , but is in fact something else : The Su -25 bombers making the strikes are armed with rockets that are not laser-guided ; the footage is coming from Su -24 tactical aircraft armed with cameras for intelligence gathering .
`` The Russians have neither the high-precision weapons , nor enough planes and prepared pilots to go by the Yugoslavia blueprint , '' wrote military analyst Alexander Golts in the news magazine Itogi .
Golts and other analysts have speculated that airstrikes will not achieve the objective of crushing the rebels , tempting Russia to try ground forces .
Some predict that if it continues to use force , Moscow will have difficulty winning over even Chechens who oppose the radical militants .
`` Yes , the Chechens are tired of bandits , but they also remember the marauding violence of the federal forces , '' Ruslan Khasbulatov , a former speaker of the Russian parliament and an ethnic Chechen , told the online publication Gazeta.ru. `` But in the event of a ground war , all of the young people will go over to the bandits to fight a guerrilla war . ''
