MOSCOW --
Russia 's military leaders have a simple explanation for the bombs raining down on Chechnya .
They say they are copying NATO 's air campaign against Yugoslavia .
From the fiery explosions at the Chechen republic 's oil refineries to the attacks on the television station in Grozny , Russia 's generals say they are taking their cues from NATO 's tactics in the Balkans .
Col. Gen. Anatoly Kornukov , the commander of the Russian air force , even gave a NATO -style briefing on Saturday .
Waving his pointer , he narrated combat videos of Russian air strikes against Chechen targets , evoking comparisons in the Russian press to NATO 's commander at the time of the Kosovo campaign , Gen. Wesley K. Clark .
But while NATO 's 78-day air campaign forced the Yugoslav president , Slobodan Milosevic , to withdraw his troops from Kosovo , military experts here do not anticipate an easy Russian victory .
They warn that there are enormous differences between Yugoslavia and Chechnya , particularly the fact that Chechnya lacks an effective central government that could bring to heel the Islamic militants Moscow is fighting .
Instead of delivering a knock-out blow , Russia 's bombing strikes may merely plunge an already lawless region into utter chaos , sow hardship among the civilians and win new recruits for the very militants Moscow wants to neutralize .
`` The Russian military is copycatting NATO , '' said Pavel Felgengauer , a military specialist .
`` But Chechnya is not Yugoslavia .
There was one guy in Belgrade named Slobodan Milosevic who could make decisions .
In Chechnya , nobody is in charge .
You ca n't bomb Chechnya into submission because there is nobody to submit . ''
In a political sense , it is not hard to understand why Moscow might be tempted to imitate NATO 's success .
Russia 's latest trouble in the Caucasus began in August when thousands of Islamic militants streamed across the border into Dagestan , seeking to establish an Islamic state .
The militants were under the leadership of Shamil Basayev , a Chechen warlord , and a man known as Khattab , a Chechen who was born in the Middle East .
Neither is under the control of the Chechen president , Aslan Maskhadov .
The rebel incursion into Dagestan was an unwelcome challenge to the Kremlin , already preoccupied by political intrigue .
None of its options was good .
The most conservative approach , and the one that Russia initially seemed to settle on , was to evict the rebels from Dagestan and then try to contain them within Chechnya .
That was the least risky course but one that left the initiative with the militants .
A second option was to mount an all-out ground invasion to rid Chechnya of the rebels once and for all .
That approach evoked bitter memories of the disastrous Chechen war , which ended in 1996 .
Many military experts believe an invasion is politically unsustainable and beyond the means of the deteriorating Russian military .
A third option was air power , the high-tech , relatively low-cost approach that NATO applied so effectively in Yugoslavia .
It offered a way to strike back at the militants while holding down Russian losses .
After a month of tangling with rebels in Dagestan , and a series of mysterious fatal bombings in Russia that left the people fearful and the government blaming the militants , Moscow embraced an air campaign .
Kornukov proudly declared that there were `` certain parallels '' between the Russian air strikes in Chechnya and the NATO campaign in the Balkans .
`` The Kremlin is using the scheme NATO applied in Kosovo , '' the newspaper Vremya declared Monday .
As did NATO , the Russian air force first moved to establish its superiority in the skies over Chechnya .
It began by bombing a radar unit at the Grozny airport and destroying the Chechen `` air force , '' which consisted of a single , propeller-driven biplane .
As did NATO , the Russian air force moved on to Chechnya 's communications network .
It bombed the republic 's cellular telephone exchange , saying it needed to prevent the rebels from talking to each other .
And it attacked Chechnya 's television station .
And as NATO did , Russian warplanes bombed oil refineries .
The Russian justification was that the rebels traded in oil on the black market and the air strikes would deprive them of revenue .
And as with NATO , Russia 's commanders have sought to prepare the public for a drawn-out campaign .
Russian officials have even left open the option of a limited ground offensive .
But so did NATO , though Western officials insisted it would be a last resort .
It is the differences , however , that worry many analysts here .
With all of its training and precision-guided ordnance , NATO had its share of `` collateral damage , '' the military 's antiseptic term for the accidental killing of civilians .
The Russian air force says it is attacking targets in Chechnya , using SU -25 attack aircraft and SU -24 bombers , equipped with precision weapons .
It is likely , however , that most of its ordnance consists of `` dumb '' gravity bombs .
One Chechen said in a telephone interview Monday that there were many civilian casualties .
`` They are hitting houses and buildings , '' he said .
`` The hospitals are full of injured people . ''
Kazbek Makhashev , a deputy minister in the Chechen government , said in a statement that more than 420 people have been killed by the Russian air strikes since early September and that more than 1,000 have been wounded .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">According to reports from the neighboring republic of Ingushetia , much of the Chechen public is in a state of panic .
More than 30,000 Chechens , and perhaps as many as 50,000 , have fled across the border seeking refuge from the fighting</ENAMEX> .
The biggest dissimilarity between Russia 's air assault and NATO 's campaign involves strategy .
NATO 's attacks put enormous pressure on Belgrade to withdraw its soldiers from Kosovo .
But no matter how hard Russia bombs Chechnya , Maskhadov has little , if any , influence with Basayev and the militants , most analysts say .
The attacks may even end up strengthening the rebels by fueling public resentment against Russia .
Seeking to justify the Russian bombardment , a senior Russian official said that there was a vacuum of authority in Chechnya and that Russia 's military campaign would show who was in control .
Boris A. Berezovsky , the tycoon who has involved himself in politics in the region , took a different tack .
He said only dialogue with the Chechen authorities and efforts to rebuild the republic would contain the rebels ' influence and prevent future acts of terrorism .
With anti- Chechen feeling running high in Moscow , some analysts have questioned whether the air raids are simply a matter of settling scores .
They warned that the fighting might spin out of control with unpredictable consequences for Russia , as well as the Caucasus .
`` A war is not planned this way , '' Andrei Piontkovsky , a political analyst , wrote in the newspaper Novaya Gazeta .
`` Only a bloody massacre . ''
