MOSCOW --
Russian troops continued to move into Chechnya on Saturday , spurring speculation that the Kremlin may be planning a land offensive against the breakaway republic .
So far , the troops have advanced only several miles into Chechnya , according to Russian commanders .
But the skirmishing inside the border and the Kremlin 's decision Friday to anoint an obscure group of pro- Moscow Chechens as the `` sole legitimate authority '' of the republic have prompted anxious conjecture here about Russia 's unfolding military strategy .
The most conservative scenario laid out by the military has the Russian army taking up and fortifying positions just inside the Chechen border in an effort to seal that frontier .
That would enable Russia to contain the Islamic rebels who have made two recent forays into the neighboring region of Dagestan from bases inside Chechnya , and to put pressure on the authorities in Grozny , the Chechen capital .
Gen. Valery Manilov , the Russian military 's first deputy chief of staff , said Saturday that the military 's goal was to develop a three-tier security zone along the border .
The aim , Manilov said , is to establish `` a tough and systemic control over everybody and everything that crosses the border in both directions . ''
Manilov insisted that there are no immediate plans for a large-scale ground operation .
But analysts say that the Russian general staff has also developed a much bolder plan .
The aim of this plan , according to Izvestiya and other newspapers that splashed it across front pages Saturday , is gradual occupation of the top third of Chechnya down to the Terek River .
There are reasons why the Kremlin might find this option attractive .
In terms of broad strategy , it would enable the Russian military to use its ground forces against Chechnya without embroiling itself the sort of all-out invasion that led to Russia 's defeat in the 1994-1996 Chechen war .
Tactically , there are some advantages as well .
Russian armor could maneuver more easily in the northern plains of Chechnya than in its mountain regions in the south , which are conducive to ambushes .
The Russian military could use the Terek River as a defensible boundary .
The population in the north , where many Cossacks live , is also thought to be more sympathetic to Russia than Chechens in the rest of the republic .
The Russian military asserts that the air strikes Moscow has carried out throughout Chechnya in the last two weeks have also softened up the opposition .
The extended use of air power is a lesson , Russian officials continue to insist , that they learned from NATO 's campaign in Kosovo .
Still , even the kind of limited invasion outlined in Saturday 's news media reports would entail enormous risks for the poorly trained and unmotivated Russian military .
The Russian forces in the northern Caucasus are burdened by an unclear command structure and would confront bad weather as winter settles in .
It also remains very contentious politically .
Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzkhov said the Russian military should insure that the territory north of the Terek River is a `` militant-free zone . ''
But former Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov -- who is Luzhkov 's political ally and a leading contender to succeed Boris Yeltsin as president after elections next summer -- Saturday repeated his opposition to `` sweeping ground operation involving federal forces in Chechnya , which might evolve into a war . ''
As Russia 's politicians debate a land attack , some experts say the Russian military may pursue a third and less obtrusive variant : the gradual expansion of security zones along the border into the Chechen interior .
The Russian military would gradually extend its reach into Chechnya but would be careful to avoid describing it as an `` invasion . ''
`` Step by step , the troops will seize zones in the north , west and east , '' said Ruslan Aushev , the president of Ingushetia , a republic bordering Chechnya .
`` A repeat of 1994 is not likely , but there is no doubt that the Chechen people will take up arms .
They simply have no other way . ''
Russian officials confirmed that there were sporadic clashes near the border Saturday .
Dagestan 's Interior Ministry , however , said that Russian troops had seized the Chechen village of Borozdinkova without opposition .
The village is about 60 miles from Grozny .
Mayrbek Vachagayev , the Chechen representative in Moscow , said it was possible that the Russian generals have not yet decided how far to take the fight .
He said that a Russian armored column had penetrated several miles into Chechen territory from the north .
`` The Russian troops have taken up positions in the hills there , and the command of the federal forces does not know what to do next , '' he told the newspaper Sevodnya .
