MOSCOW --
The Russian government Friday came under increasing pressure at home and abroad to avoid a full-scale war in Chechnya , even as warplanes pressed their assault on the breakaway republic and ground forces made a limited incursion across the border .
Three years after an unsettled truce ended a ferocious war between Russian troops and separatist guerrillas in the southern republic , Russia appears again on the brink of a large , if limited , military entanglement in Chechnya .
The United States Friday urged Russia to use `` restraint and wisdom '' in its drive against rebels in Chechnya .
The State Department has asked Russian officials to clarify their intentions .
`` We continue to believe that any resumption of general hostilities in Chechnya would damage Russia 's own interests and would further threaten stability in the entire northern Caucasus region , '' State Department spokesman James Rubin told reporters in Washington .
Until reports Thursday and Friday that ground forces had moved into Chechnya to occupy positions in the highlands just inside the border , Russian 's military operation had resembled NATO 's strategy during the war over Kosovo -- an air-only campaign that began 10 days ago .
While Russia 's air operations against Chechnya have won approval from the majority of the public , a ground invasion conjures painful memories of Russia 's disastrous war in the republic from 1994 to 1996 .
Chechnya claimed independence when Russian troops withdrew , but Moscow maintains that the republic remains part of the Russian Federation .
`` If it is a ground operation , a wide-ranging operation with many federal army units , and resistance from fighters -- which there will be -- we will have many casualties among our soldiers and civilians , '' warned former Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov , now the popular leader of a major political faction opposing President Boris Yeltsin .
`` I think this should n't be considered , '' he added in an interview Friday night on Russian television .
An editorial in the popular Russian daily Moskovsky Komsomolets said Friday : `` With our poverty , we soon might face the same thing we faced some time ago -- shame and new coffins .
But the problem now is there is no money even for the coffins . ''
Prime Minister Vladimir Putin has stressed the right of Russian troops to move wherever they wish on Russian territory -- including Chechnya -- but has also said Russia will avoid a repeat of its brutal war with Chechen rebels .
At least 30,000 people are believed to have died in that war , which ended with a humiliating retreat by Russian forces .
Russian Defense Minister Igor Sergeyev suggested Friday that Moscow was not planning a massive ground invasion of Chechnya but would patrol a `` security zone '' inside the border .
In recent days , Russian officials have indicated that such a buffer zone could be used to deter Chechen guerrillas from infiltrating to neighboring Russian territory .
Others have suggested that the Kremlin has not ruled out a full-scale invasion of the territory 900 miles south of Moscow .
Russia has amassed about 50,000 troops , supported by tanks , artillery and helicopters , along its border with Chechnya .
`` A security zone is being created sufficient to guarantee security , '' Sergeyev said .
Asked whether the zone would include the Chechen capital Grozny , Sergeyev said , `` everything will depend on further developments . ''
Russian planes have struck oil refineries , communications links , airports and other targets inside Chechnya that Moscow insists are used by Islamic militants to finance and support terror and guerrilla warfare .
The offensive was begun after a series of terror attacks on apartment buildings in Moscow and other cities killed nearly 300 people .
Russian officials have blamed Chechnya for supporting terrorists and allowing Islamic guerrillas in August to invade neighboring Dagestan , a southern republic under Russia 's control .
In Washington , Rubin called on Russia to open `` a political dialogue with the more pragmatic leaders in the north Caucasus , not antagonizing them or their populations . ''
He disputed as an `` almost ridiculous analogy '' comparisons to the NATO campaign in Kosovo and the current Russian strategy in Chechnya .
Unlike Yugoslavia 's President Slobodan Milosevic , who controlled troops ravaging the Kosovo province , `` In the case of Chechnya , there is no leader to coerce who has control over the rebels , '' he said .
But on Friday , Putin announced that Russia no longer recognized the government of moderate Chechen President Aslan Maskhadov and effectively rejects the treaties signed in 1996 that ended the war .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The bombing has forced as many as 88,000 refugees to flee Chechnya for the neighboring Russian republic of Ingushetia to the west , according to the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees</ENAMEX> .
The U.N. agency began deliveries of supplies to Ingushetia on Friday , officials said .
A Russian government agency estimated this week that the refugee total could climb as high as 200,000 .
-LRB- EDs : Story can end here .
Optional add follows . -RRB-
Reports say Russian ground forces , supported by tanks , have not met resistance in their limited movement into Chechnya , occupying six villages and establishing positions on strategic high ground as far as six miles into the rebel republic .
In a television interview Thursday night , from Grozny Chechen Defense Minister Magomed Khambiev said more than 50,000 well-armed and professionally trained fighters are ready to engage the Russian forces .
Russian ground forces need to complete their thrust into Chechnya within the next six weeks if they want to set up a buffer zone , according to a Russian military newspaper .
Fog and rain -- and snow in the higher elevations of the Northern Caucasus mountains -- could hamper ground and air operations , the newspaper said , quoting military sources .
It also reported that Russian special forces are considering commando raids specifically to target the two Chechen warlords -- Shamil Basayev and a Jordanian -born fighter known simply as Khattab -- who led incursions into Dagestan in August and September .
The elite units would go into Chechnya after the region 's infrastructure had been destroyed , Yuri Baluyevsky , first deputy head of the Armed Forces ' General Staff , was quoted as telling the newspaper .
ENDIT
