MOSCOW --
As many as 32 Russian commandos were killed last Wednesday when their convoy was attacked in a rebel ambush , the Defense Ministry said Saturday .
Earlier reports had put the death toll at seven , with about 30 missing .
The deadly attack , one of the worst in a widening partisan war , took place as a convoy of 41 elite Interior Ministry troops , on their way to the village of Dargo , were attacked near Zhani - Vedeno , deep in the mountains of southern Chechnya .
Another group from Vedeno came to their aid , many of whom were seriously wounded .
Altogether , only five or six officers managed to break through the ambush , according to various published reports .
The Itar - Tass news agency , quoting Victor Medveditskov , a top Interior Ministry official , said Saturday that 32 bodies had been tentatively identified .
According to Interfax , quoting unidentified sources , only 19 bodies had been recovered in heavily mined terrain .
One wounded man was found three days after the attack .
The ambush was the second against an elite unit since an attack in the Chechen capital , Grozny , against a unit from the Moscow region that left 20 dead .
An entire company of paratroopers , based in the city of Pskov , was wiped out early last month in southern Chechnya , and 84 servicemen were killed .
At a news conference Friday , Lt. Gen. Valeri Manilov said the number of servicemen killed in the north Caucasus had reached 2,036 , with 6,076 wounded .
The figures include military and Interior Ministry troops killed last September in the region of Dagestan after it came under attack by Chechen rebels , as well as those who have died or been wounded in fighting in Chechnya .
`` One should n't underestimate the enemy , '' said Manilov , who not long ago said the rebel forces were disorganized , and hampered by a lack of communication .
The U.N. high commissioner for human rights , Mary Robinson , arrived Saturday in the region , on an inspection tour that will take her to detention facilities where Russian troops have allegedly beaten and tortured Chechen civilians .
Robinson has said she will investigate the evidence for alleged human rights abuses committed by both sides in the six-month war .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Robinson began Saturday by touring refugee camps in neighboring Ingushetia , where more than 200,000 Chechens have fled since the Russian military began its campaign in their breakaway home region last fall .</ENAMEX>
Human rights groups and Western journalists have reported a series of atrocities committed against civilians by Russian troops as they moved through Grozny and other towns and villages in Chechnya to clear out rebel fighters .
Human Rights Watch , which recently had documented 120 cases of civilians executed by Russian troops , Friday added another seven to the list with a detailed report of executions that it said took place in the village of Gekhi - Chu on Feb. 7 .
Russia 's conduct of the war in Chechnya is now being debated at the U.N. Commission for Human Rights in Geneva , and will be taken up at the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe on Monday .
President -elect Vladimir Putin , who has taken responsibility for the war , which was started soon after he became prime minister last August , has said that Moscow had to use military means to take back control of a region that had become a haven for terrorists , bandits and kidnappers .
Saturday , Russian news agencies reported that experts were examining the body of a hostage found in Chechnya which may possibly be that of Maj. Gen. Gennadi Shpigun , the Interior Ministry 's representative in Chechnya who was kidnapped a year ago from his car at Grozny airport .
The brazen kidnapping had a big impact in Moscow , where top officials -- including then- Interior Minister Sergei Stepashin -- vowed publicly to use whatever means necessary to get back their colleague .
In later interviews , Stepashin , who served briefly as prime minister before Putin , said that the Shpigun kidnapping led to preparations for a military operation that was to occupy the northern half of Chechnya , and establish a `` cordon sanitaire '' along the Terek River that divides Chechnya roughly in two .
Sergei Yastrzhembsky , Russia 's chief spokesman on Chechnya , said Saturday that forensic experts were examining the body retrieved in Chechnya , but that no certain identification had been made .
A German newspaper reported Saturday that the body believed to be that of Shpigun had been found near the village of Duba -yurt , in the Argun gorge .
According to Sueddeutsche Zeitung , Shpigun had eluded his captors and frozen to death in the forest .
