MOSCOW --
The Russian military , reeling from a series of bold attacks by separatist rebels in Chechnya , has started cracking down on civilians , preventing Chechen men and boys from fleeing or entering the war-torn province .
Human rights advocates are condemning the policy as endangering civilians .
The punitive restrictions illustrate one of Russia 's fundamental problems in its military campaign in Chechnya .
The Kremlin has said for months it is fighting `` terrorists and bandits '' in an effort to bring law and order to the troubled region .
But frequently the conflict has looked more like a war waged by Moscow against the entire Chechen people .
Soldiers at border checkpoints between Chechnya and neighboring Russian regions have been barring males between the ages of 10 and 60 from entering or leaving , according to reports from the region .
Human rights groups have condemned the policy , and the Paris -based Doctors Without Borders Thursday accused Moscow of committing `` war crimes '' in Chechnya .
But officials in Moscow defended the move as part of security measures to prevent rebel fighters from getting behind Russian lines .
`` It is better to check than to have a bloody slaughter , '' said Vladimir Kalamanov , director of Russia 's federal migration service .
In a report released Thursday , the New York -based Human Rights Watch , which has sent observers to the region , said the restrictions are breaking up families and forcing civilians back into the war zone .
Zura Mumayedova , a refugee who fled Chechnya this week , told Human Rights Watch she saw soldiers send back into Chechnya a 59-year -old man who was trying to flee the fighting .
`` The Russian soldiers said that no men aged between 10 and 60 would be allowed through , '' the report quoted her as saying .
Datu Isigova , a refugee from Chechnya 's capital Grozny , was quoted as saying she was forced by soldiers to leave her 11-year -old son and husband behind as she fled to the neighboring republic of Ingushetia .
`` Russian authorities are obliged under humanitarian law to do everything possible to avoid civilian casualties and allow civilians to flee to safety , '' said Holly Carter , director of Human Rights Watch 's Europe and Central Asia division .
`` By preventing Chechen men and young boys from leaving the republic , the Russians are deliberately violating their international obligations . ''
Military experts here criticized the policy as ineffective .
`` This is an angry reaction with no rationale , '' said Pavel Felgenhauer , a Moscow -based defense analyst .
`` Harassing civilians is not a way to fight a guerrilla war and such measures will not stop rebel attacks . ''
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Likewise , Ruslan Aushev , leader of the neighboring province of Ingushetia , which is taking in most of the war 's refugees , called the policy a mistake</ENAMEX> .
`` In fighting terrorism , you must not battle with peaceful civilians , '' Aushev said in televised comments .
The medical aid organization Doctors Without Borders , winners of last year 's Nobel Peace Prize , condemned the entire Russian campaign in Chechnya in an open letter to President Clinton .
`` Cities , villages , hospitals , refugee convoys and corridors have now become targets .
These acts against civilians constitute war crimes , '' the group wrote .
Since entering Chechnya in late September , Russian forces have made steady progress in occupying the separatist province 's northern districts .
But despite heavy air and artillery bombardment of the republic 's capital Grozny , Russian troops there have been out maneuvered by the agile Chechen fighters and have been bogged down outside the city for weeks .
In surprise attacks this past weekend , Chechen rebels broke through Russian lines in three cities that had previously been under Moscow 's control .
Russian military leaders claimed to have regained control over two of the towns , Argun and Shali , although they are still reporting fighting on the outskirts of Gudermes , Chechnya 's second largest city .
After the attacks , Colonel General Viktor Kazantsev , Russia 's commander in the region said the military had made `` mistakes '' by being too `` soft-hearted '' with the Chechen rebels .
He also said that only women , children and the elderly would be treated as refugees in Chechnya , implying that all adult males were guilty of siding with the rebels until proven otherwise .
