MOSCOW , December 19 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov Sunday rejected a proposed plan to hold an international conference on Chechnya .
He said the idea , put forward by acting Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe -LRB- OSCE -RRB- Chairman and Norwegian Foreign Minister Knut Vollebaek , `` is not likely to be viable or feasible because it was conceived out of touch with reality . ''
`` Why should a conference be held with leaders in the North Caucasus , in particular those of Daghestan , Ingushetia and North Ossetia , when all of them are members of the -LRB- Russian -RRB- Federation Council and can discuss in that body any issues pertaining to the situation in that region ? '' the Interfax news agency quoted Ivanov as saying .
The Federation Council is the upper house of parliament .
There has been mounting pressure from the West on Russia 's military campaign against rebels in the breakaway republic of Chechnya .
The offensives , now in the third month , were launched following Chechen rebels ' armed incursions into neighboring Daghestan and a spate of terrorist bombings , also blamed on Chechen militants , which killed more than 300 people in Moscow and two other Russian cities .
Moscow has brushed aside Western criticism of the actions in Chechnya , saying it is its internal affair .
`` Russia is not the kind of country that can be addressed in the language of ultimatums and threats , '' Ivanov said .
`` One can say confidently that as the anti-terrorist operation in Chechnya is brought to completion and more efforts are made to restore peaceful life in that republic , Russia may expect opposition on the part of the West to give way to active cooperation , '' Ivanov said .
According to General Anatoly Kvashnin , chief of the General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces , federal troops have nearly assumed full control of the territory of Chechnya .
`` The militants are blocked by troops on all sides , '' the general said Sunday , adding that federal forces are also pounding rebels in the southern mountainous parts of Chechnya .
