MOSCOW , January 13 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Russian federal troops continued their assaults on rebels in the breakaway republic of Chechnya Thursday and fiercer fighting there have prompted the increase of refugee exodus to neighboring regions .
The federal forces have completed the blocking of the rebel formations in the area of the villages Belgatoi , Tsentoroi and Benoi - Vedeno in the Vedeno and Shali districts , the Interfax news agency reported , citing sources with the Russian Defense Ministry .
Up to 40 rebels were killed and three weapon emplacements and nine trucks destroyed in the process .
In Grozny , the Chechen capital , federal Russian troops continue to be engaged in trench fighting , with artillery fire against rebel position in the city as well as in neighboring areas Chu , Yaryshmardy , Chishki , Ulus - Kert , Khimoi , and Chernorechye .
One federal serviceman was killed and three wounded over the last 24 hours , Interfax said , citing official information .
Meanwhile , interior troops continued the special operation of '' cleaning up '' Chechen areas under federal control .
General Anatoly Kvashnin , chief of Russia 's general staff , said the Russian flag had been hoisted and a police station set up in the Chechen village of Nozhai - Yurt .
He told the NTV television station that federal forces had occupied the village of Sharoi and nearly all of the Sharoi district in Chechnya 's mountainous part .
Following intensified fighting in Chechnya , the number of refugees fleeing the republic is rising again , exceeding the number of people coming back .
The return of refugees to Chechnya has been suspended following militant attacks on the towns of Argun , Shali and Gudermes , director of the Russian Federal Migration Service Vladimir Kalamanov said Thursday .
Federal troops have strengthened the screening of Chechen refugees crossing the borders with neighboring regions , but the tougher measures came under fire from Ruslan Aushev , president of the neighboring Ingushetia republic .
