MOSCOW , May 12 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- A Russian journalist and two federal police officers were killed in the breakaway republic of Chechnya on Friday when their vehicle was ambushed by rebels , said the Russian military command in Chechnya .
Alexander Yefremov , reporter for the Nashe Vremya -LRB- Our Times -RRB- newspaper based in the Russian Siberia city of Tyumen , and the two policemen were shot dead while their vehicle , traveling along the Alkhan - Kala - Grozny road , came under fire during a rebel ambush , the Russian military command in Chechnya was quoted by the Interfax news agency as saying .
`` All of the three persons were killed -- two police officers and the journalist Yefremov .
This happened in the vicinity of the village of Kirov , which is four kilometers from Grozny , '' said the command .
The military said Friday that Chechen rebels may have changed their tactics , ambushing federal troops only in small groups so as to move unseen and make their escape easier .
In the republic of Ingushetia , which borders Chechnya , 19 Russian servicemen were killed on Thursday when their convoy was attacked by rebels .
The military command also warned on Friday that Chechen rebels may intensify their fighting against federal troops and the rebel forces will swell in size as soon as the mercenaries arrive from Russia 's neighboring republics and other countries .
Scattered rebel groups , which have managed to restore their lines of communication and command , have set up a network of agents in the Chechen regions controlled by federal troops , said the Russian forces ' headquarters in the North Caucasus .
At least 53 people died in clashes between Russian federal troops and rebels in Chechnya on Thursday , reports said Friday .
Over 30 rebels and two Russian Interior Ministry soldiers were shot dead in fighting outside the Chechen village of Serzhen - Yurt on Thursday , with another four federal servicemen wounded , said Interfax .
The band of more than 30 rebels were ambushed by an Interior Ministry reconnaissance unit near the village , the report said .
Another federal reconnaissance unit killed 21 rebels at their base on a deserted sheep farm near the village of Niki - Khita in south Chechnya .
Two Russian servicemen were injured in the fighting , the Itar - Tass news agency quoted the Russian forces ' press center in the North Caucasus as saying .
