NEW DELHI , India
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
A decade ago , it seemed nothing could come between Buddhi Kota Subbarao and a successful physics career .
He was headed to the United States to work with telecommunications giant AT and T and hoped to develop India 's first nuclear submarine when he returned .
Everything changed on May 30 , 1988 .
As he prepared to board a plane at Bombay airport for his trip to America , a customs officer demanded Subbarao open his briefcase and found a sheaf of documents on nuclear reactors .
Subbarao was charged with spying .
It took five years -- more than two of them spent in jail -- for Subbarao to clear himself .
Now a lawyer , Subbarao wants more justice .
He is determined to put India 's notoriously slow and overburdened justice system , which he blames in part for his ordeal , on trial .
The documents on nuclear reactors -- his doctoral thesis that he wanted U.S. scholars to review -- were found to be unclassified .
Subbarao suspects airport customs officials were tipped off as part of a conspiracy .
But he never found evidence that powerful officials tried to frame him .
In May , Subbarao wrote to President K.R. Narayanan accusing two Supreme Court judges who handled his case , retired Chief Justice A.M. Ahmadi and the judge set to become the next chief , A.S. Anand , of ignoring evidence .
Ahmadi was unavailable for comment .
Anand , like other judges in India , does not speak to the press .
Narayanan referred the petition to federal government officials to determine what , if any , action should be taken .
Subbarao 's plea to the president may eventually be lost in the Indian bureaucratic labyrinth , but it could revive interest in a case that once won the backing of leading civil rights campaigners and constitutional experts .
Usha Mehta , a civil rights activist who led a campaign on Subbarao 's behalf in 1988 , is among those convinced he was the victim of a conspiracy .
Judges erred by failing to fully study the evidence or because they lacked `` the courage to act against the injustice , '' she said .
In 1976 , Subbarao , then a 39-year -old physicist and navy captain , began work on a nuclear submarine being developed by the navy and the Bhabha Atomic Research Center , known as BARC .
He says he pointed out flaws in the designs of BARC scientists that eventually led the late Prime Minister Indira Gandhi to cut off funds .
Subbarao quit the navy a few years later .
He submitted his own submarine design as a doctoral thesis , earning a degree in 1985 .
Shortly before Subbarao 's arrest , Rajiv Gandhi , who had succeeded his mother as prime minister , revived the nuclear submarine project .
Subbarao said Rajiv Gandhi asked him to lead it , but the government 's confirmation process was never completed .
`` BARC already had an animosity for me , '' Subbarao said in a telephone interview from his home in Bombay .
`` When Rajiv Gandhi tried to give me the command of the project , they conspired to destroy me . ''
Raja Ramanna , regarded as one of the pioneers of India 's atomic research program , was chief of BARC at the time .
He refused to comment on Subbarao 's claims .
Subbarao says reporters , judges , prosecutors and his lawyer did not understand the thesis police said contained military secrets .
He believes special courts should be established so that experts can help judge technical cases .
This year , the Supreme Court acquitted two rocket experts who were accused of heading a ring of spies in space laboratories in southern India , allegedly working for rival Pakistan .
The scientists had been on trial for four years .
Jane 's Intelligence Review reported in June that India is expected to produce its first nuclear submarine by 2004 .
