WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- New charges were filed Friday against defendants accused in what authorities say was the largest Cuban spy ring uncovered in the United States in decades .
The new charges included conspiracy to perpetrate murder in connection with the February 1996 shootdown of two planes flown by a Cuban exile group , the Justice Department said Friday .
A grand jury indictment filed in federal court in Miami on Friday accuses Gerardo Hernandez and several others of conspiring to have a violent confrontation with airplanes flown by Brothers to the Rescue , a Cuban exile group .
Four members of the exile group died three years ago when Cuban fighter jets shot down two small planes searching for rafters in international waters .
`` The object of the conspiracy was for co-conspirators to function as covert spies serving the interests of the government of the Republic of Cuba within the United States by gathering and transmitting information to the Cuban government concerning United States military installations , government functions and private political activity , '' the indictment said .
In the indictment Friday , Hernandez was charged with conspiracy to commit murder , an offense that could put him in prison for life .
After the 1996 shooting , the indictment said , Cuba 's spy agency recognized Hernandez for his role and promoted him to captain .
The 14 defendants also were accused of infiltrating , informing on and manipulating anti- Castro Cuban political groups in Miami and Dade County , spreading disinformation within the groups and carrying out orders from the Cuban government .
One of them , Juan Pablo Roque , also known by the nickname `` German , '' was assigned to penetrate and inform on Brothers to the Rescue .
Ten defendants were arrested in September 1998 and remain in pretrial detention , prosecutors said .
Five of them have already pleaded guilty to spy-related charges .
Arrest warrants have been issued for four others , including Roque .
The trial on all charges is scheduled for September .
