Monday , Feb. 28 , 2000 McCain , Bush Trade Barbs VIRGINIA BEACH , Va. -LRB- AP -RRB- -- Accused of dividing his party and helping the Democrats , John McCain said Monday he was instead trying to expand the GOP to become `` a party as big as the country we serve . ''
Republican presidential rival George W. Bush strongly disagreed , saying of McCain , `` He is a person who obviously wants to divide people into camps . ''
The comments followed McCain 's speech here -- in the headquarters city of Pat Robertson 's Christian Coalition -- accusing some in his party of pandering to Christian right leaders `` on the outer reaches of American politics . ''
Flood Waters Threaten Mozambique MAPUTO , Mozambique -LRB- AP -RRB- -- Rescuers plucked thousands of people from trees and rooftops Monday , but many others were left behind and forced to spend another night on precarious perches above rising flood waters in Mozambique .
Officials say thousands have died in the deluge .
While there was no precise death toll , officials said it was certain that the number of dead was in the thousands .
Other aid workers said the toll would continue to climb , especially as people begin dying of flood-borne diseases over the next few weeks .
The Mozambican government estimates more than 200,000 people have been left homeless since torrential rains hit the impoverished African nation three weeks ago .
Alleged Cuban Spy Faces Deadline TORONTO -LRB- AP -RRB- -- An alleged Cuban spy permitted into Canada after being expelled from the United States stayed inside the Cuban Embassy on Monday as the time limit on his two-day transit visa ran down .
Foreign Affairs Minister Lloyd Axworthy said Jose Imperatori , 46 , would become an illegal alien if he remained in Canada beyond the two-day limit allowed by the visa granted Imperatori upon his arrival in Montreal on Saturday night .
On Saturday , Imperatori resigned his consular position , giving up his diplomatic immunity , and said he intended to defy the U.S. State Department 's expulsion order so he could contest allegations linking him with U.S. immigration official Mariano Faget , who has been charged with spying for Cuba .
New Charges Against ` Sammy the Bull ' PHOENIX -LRB- AP -RRB- -- Former Mafia hitman Salvatore `` Sammy the Bull '' Gravano , arrested last week for allegedly masterminding a statewide drug ring , was charged Monday with racketeering , conspiracy and money laundering .
Attorney General Janet Napolitano filed a new complaint , charging Gravano , three family members and 42 others with a total of 181 counts .
They had all initially been arrested on a single count of conspiracy to distribute a dangerous drug .
The ecstasy drug ring , which allegedly started as a small-scale operation , was selling 20,000 to 30,000 pills a week once Gravano put his weight behind it , authorities said .
The designer drug sells for $ 20 to $ 30 per pill .
Austria 's Freedom Party Leader Steps Down VIENNA , Austria -LRB- AP -RRB- -- Austrian right-wing leader Joerg Haider resigned as head of the Freedom Party today , seen by some as a way to end his country 's international ostrascism .
The outrage was based on Haider 's anti-immigrant stand and his past praise of World War II veterans of Germany 's murderous Waffen SS and Adolf Hitler 's `` orderly '' employment policies .
Haider holds no post in the national government , But his image and his iron-hand control of the Freedom Party made him the most visible member of the Austrian political establishment , eclipsing his governing coalition partners , the center-right Austrian People 's Party of Chancellor Wolfgang Schuessel .
Landmark Conviction in Web Gambling NEW YORK -LRB- AP -RRB- -- A man who operated a sports betting business on the Internet was convicted by a federal jury today in what is believed to be the first case of its kind to go to trial .
The jury in U.S. District Court in Manhattan concluded that Jay Cohen , 33 , broke a federal law by accepting bets and wagers on sports events over the Internet and telephone .
Cohen , president of World Sports Exchange in Antigua , was among 22 defendants charged in March 1998 with operating offshore companies that took bets from Americans via the Internet or toll-free telephone numbers .
Japan Stocks Higher at Midday TOKYO -LRB- AP -RRB- -- The 225-issue Nikkei Stock Average gained 225.27 points to 19,945.37 at the end of the morning session .
On Monday , the Dow Jones industrial average rose 176.53 to 10,038.65 .
Heat Scorch Knicks 85-76 MIAMI -LRB- AP -RRB- -- The Miami Heat overcame Alonzo Mourning 's absence and a 20-point first-half deficit Monday night , rallying past the New York Knicks 85-76 .
Sparked by Jamal Mashburn and Clarence Weatherspoon , the shorthanded Heat came back with smothering defense after they fell behind 37-17 .
Mourning was not in uniform because of a sore left ankle he injured Saturday at Washington , and he said he wo n't make the trip for Tuesday 's game at San Antonio .
Heat guard Voshon Lenard also missed the game with a lower abdominal strain .
AP NewsBrief by PAULINE M. MILLARD
