MIAMI
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- A U.S. immigration official with `` secret '' security clearance was arrested Thursday and charged with spying for the Cuban government , the FBI said .
Mariano Faget , 54 , was being held at the Federal Detention Center in Miami and was to appear in court Friday , the FBI said in a statement .
Faget , a native of Havana , is employed at the Immigration and Naturalization Service as a supervisory district adjudication officer .
He held a `` secret '' security clearance and was responsible for supervising decisions that affected immigrants and people seeking political asylum , the FBI said .
`` Faget has access to classified and sensitive INS files relating to confidential law enforcement sources and Cuban defectors , '' the FBI said .
The agency said he had made unauthorized contacts with Cuban intelligence officers in Miami and in other U.S. cities .
It could not be determined it Faget was represented by an attorney ; there was no answer at his home Thursday night .
A message was not immediately returned .
A spokesman for the Cuban Interests Section , which represents the nation in Washington , declined comment .
The White House also had no comment , spokesman Mike Hammer said .
The FBI said it would n't release any further details on the case until a news conference set for Friday morning .
Russ Bergeron , director of media relations at INS headquarters in Washington , said he could not comment on Faget 's arrest .
He said it is INS policy to cooperate with such investigations .
Jose Basulto , president of the Cuban exile group Brothers to the Rescue , said he believed there were many Cuban spies working in the United States .
`` The U.S. should be very embarrassed by this finding , '' he said .
`` Until the cancer is removed , which is Castro , this will continue . ''
In October 1998 , 14 people were charged in Florida in what authorities called the largest Cuban espionage ring uncovered in the United States in decades .
Authorities said the group tried to penetrate U.S. military bases , infiltrate anti- Castro exile groups and manipulate U.S. media and political organizations .
FBI spokesman Terry Nelson told The Orlando Sentinel that Faget 's arrest was unrelated to this spy ring .
Five people of the 14 have pleaded guilty and the other are scheduled for trial in May .
The United States severed diplomatic relations with Cuba in January 1961 , two years after Fidel Castro 's rise to power , and initiated a trade embargo in 1962 .
Travel to and from the country is restricted by the U.S. government , but athletic , cultural and academic exchanges have been allowed .
Relations between the United States and Cuba recently have been strained by the case of Elian Gonzalez .
The INS has said the 6-year -old boy should be returned to his father in Cuba while his relatives in Miami have been fighting to keep the boy in the United States .
Elian survived a crossing from Cuba last November but his mother drowned when their boat capsized .
