In 1964 , Richard Sorge , the celebrated spy who provided information to Soviet military intelligence from his base in World War II Tokyo , officially became a hero of the Soviet Union .
It did him no good , since he had been executed in Japan in 1943 , but it illustrated the paradox of his remarkable career .
After his capture by the Japanese , against whom he had spied , Sorge was offered to the Soviet Union in exchange for Japanese spies imprisoned in Russia .
`` The man called Richard Sorge is unknown to us , '' Soviet officials replied , wanting nothing to do with their most important espionage agent in Asia .
It could be said that the man called Richard Sorge has been unknown to most of us .
But thanks to `` Stalin 's Spy , '' by the British journalist Robert Whymant , we now know a great deal about the romantic , intelligent , reckless and extraordinary German communist who was one of history 's most successful spies .
That he was recognized for his accomplishments in Russia only 21 years after his execution is merely one of several paradoxes in a history that is scrupulously and readably presented in Whymant 's book .
Another is that Stalin ignored the single most important piece of information that it would have been possible for a Soviet spy to obtain : advance knowledge of Germany 's plans to invade the Soviet Union in 1941 .
More important , perhaps , Sorge , though a pro- Soviet communist , credibly emerges in Whymant 's portrayal as a hero , and not only to the Soviet Union .
His major motivation was hatred of Hitler and Nazism in Germany , and his work was aimed at hastening their defeat .
`` Certainly , Sorge 's primary duty in Tokyo was to help the Soviet Union ward off a very real threat from Japan , '' Whymant writes .
`` However , he saw Nazi Germany as the most evil and dangerous foe , not only of Russia but of civilization itself . ''
Thwarted by Stalin 's stubborn refusal to believe his warning of the German invasion , Sorge leaked that information to an American journalist , Joseph Newman of The New York Herald Tribune .
He also provided information to Western reporters on Japan 's ambitions to conquer Southeast Asia .
`` Taking a broad strategic view , Sorge reckoned that it was imperative to alert the Western democracies to Japan 's aggressive designs , '' Whymant concludes .
Whymant , who spent some 20 years researching this book , tracked down survivors of the Tokyo espionage ring that Sorge led and made good use of newly opened Soviet archives to piece together the full and fascinating story of `` Stalin 's Spy . ''
Sorge was born in Baku , Azerbaijan , where his German father worked in the oil fields .
But Sorge , whose mother was Russian , was taken at an early age to Germany , growing up in Berlin and serving as an artillery bombardier in World War I. Wounded and disillusioned , he returned home from the war and quickly became active in the Communist Party .
In the mid-1920s , he was recruited by the Comintern , the Communist International , to become a Soviet agent .
His first posting was Shanghai , China , during an early stage of the conflict between Chinese Nationalists and Communists .
Among his closest friends was the pro- Communist American journalist Agnes Smedley , who introduced him to some of the people who would later form part of his secret circle in Tokyo , including a well-connected , secretly left-wing Japanese journalist named Ozaki Hotsumi .
Called back to Moscow in 1933 , Sorge was soon sent to Tokyo with instructions to report on Japan 's intentions toward the Soviet Union in the global conflict already looming .
Sorge returned for a time to Germany to establish his connections as a German journalist .
His wartime service and his wounds served him well as he sought letters of introduction to German officials , including the German military attache Eugen Ott , who would later become Hitler 's ambassador to Japan .
Sorge arrived in Tokyo in September 1933 as an officer in the Soviet army , attached to the 4th Department , responsible for agents operating in foreign countries .
During his nine years in Japan , he built a small but remarkable network of informers who fed Moscow an amazing stream of information .
Whymant 's account of those years is gripping and instructive , and not only because of Sorge 's exploits in espionage .
Sorge lived tempestuously and licentiously in Tokyo , drinking to excess , speeding around town on a motorcycle and pursuing Japanese and German women -LRB- including a visiting anti- Nazi harpsichordist named Eta Harich - Schneider -RRB- .
Surprisingly , he did not even bother much to conceal his pro- Russian and anti- Nazi sentiments , which seem to have been dismissed in the German Embassy as the quirks of a brilliant and valuable analyst of Japan .
While a few gaps in the record remain unfilled , Whymant is able to tell us almost exactly how Sorge built his Tokyo network and how he obtained the information he passed on to the Soviet Union .
A key to his success was his friendship with Ozaki Hotsumi , his old friend from Shanghai who belonged to the circle of advisers around the Japanese prime minister , Prince Konoye .
But the most important intelligence that fell into Sorge 's hands came from the Germans .
Sorge was so trusted in the embassy that his good friend Ott sent him on a secret mission to Shanghai , giving him the German cipher tables used in communications with Berlin .
`` It stretches the imagination to suppose that these coveted keys were not spirited out of Japan and passed on to Moscow 's code-breakers , '' Whymant writes .
Whymant covers all of the essential questions about the Soviet spy 's career , including Sorge 's growing ambivalence toward the Soviet Union under Stalin and the sense he had of being trapped in his role .
In 1937 he ignored an order to return to Moscow for consultations , apparently sensing that he might be imprisoned , or executed , if he obeyed it .
Japan 's counterespionage finally caught up with him in 1942 after interrogation of a minor member of his network .
After months of questioning , he was hanged .
Had the Japanese been able to turn him over to the Russians , he would almost certainly have been shot , given Stalin 's embarrassment at having ignored Sorge 's information about Hitler 's invasion plans .
In other words , Whymant 's portrayal of Sorge 's life as one of tragic ambiguity is persuasive .
`` Stalin 's Spy '' is an utterly fascinating book that treats Sorge with the complexity that his life and career deserve .
PUBLICATION NOTES : ` STALIN 'S SPY ' Richard Sorge and the Tokyo Espionage Ring By Robert Whymant Illustrated .
368 pages .
St. Martin 's Press .
$ 25.95
