LANGLEY , Va. --
The mostly empty parking lots , corridors and offices were a concession to the holiday , but the operations center of the nation 's spying apparatus was fully staffed Friday except for one worker who phoned in sick .
`` We are the eyes and ears of the director , '' said Phillip Glover , the senior duty officer , speaking of his boss , George Tenet , the director of Central Intelligence .
`` We are sort of the watchdog , after hours , 24 hours . ''
In many cities people spend holidays away from their families because their jobs never stop -- police officers , firefighters , hospital nurses and the like .
Washington has these , too , but it also has full-timers unique to a capital , like those who handle foreign intelligence at the CIA and the domestic equivalent at the FBI .
Behind Glover several television sets and clocks gave the times at various places around the world .
On his desk computer monitors hummed quietly but secure telephones did not ring .
`` We never say it 's a slow day because there 's always something happening , '' Glover said .
U.S. intelligence has been on a special alert since the bombings earlier this year at two United States embassies in Africa , and particular attention is being paid to trouble spots like Iraq and Kosovo .
The CIA also has a special interest in Osama bin Laden , the suspected terrorist who recently denied any role in the embassy bombings .
Only a small fraction of the employees were on the job Friday , said Mark Mansfield , the CIA 's deputy director of public affairs .
But he would not disclose the number of people who worked at the agency 's huge headquarters in Langley , a series of modern buildings on a campuslike setting across the Potomac River from Washington in the Virginia suburbs .
One working Friday was Wayne Myers , the duty officer of the Foreign Broadcast Information Service , which is part of the operations center and continuously monitors foreign news sources .
Asked about Friday 's priorities , he mentioned bin Laden , Iraq and world opinion on the recent attacks on Iraq by the United States and Britain .
As Myers spoke , the information service , which is popularly known by its acronyn Fibis and is widely available , reported on optimistic local accounts on the health of two foreign leaders .
The Jordanian newspaper ` Arab al- Yawn related that the country 's ambassador to the United States had said that King Hussein , who has been treated for cancer in the United States , `` is in excellent shape and will leave the hospital within the next two days . ''
That came in at 12 : 14 p.m .
Five minutes later , a report came in from the Interfax news agency in Russia quoting the leader of Belarus , Alexander Lukashenko , as having said that Russian President Boris Yeltsin `` is in excellent physical shape . ''
Yeltsin had heart bypass surgery two years ago and has been hospitalized five times since then , most recently because of pneumonia .
Glover noted that there had been recent reports in Russia that Yeltsin was planning to make some trips abroad .
Another broadcast service report came in .
A leader of the Palestinian militant group Hamas had been released from house arrest and he used the occasion to denounce the United States .
`` We pretty much have the world at this desk , '' Myers said .
Over at the cubicle of the National Imagery and Mapping Agency , its officer , Carl Brennan , dealt with selecting subjects to be put under the lens of U.S. spy satellites .
When asked what images were acquired , he answered : `` It 's what 's interesting .
You can assume that there 's a lot of interest about Iraq and also Serbia .
Last week was very busy -- bomb damage in Iraq .
We are interested today in activity in Sierra Leone . ''
The last reference was to a civil war in West Africa .
`` But it 's calmer now , thankfully , '' Brennan said .
`` Last week was not a lot of fun . ''
Glover and his colleagues were putting in just another long day -LRB- they work 12 hours on and 12 hours off , three or four days a week -RRB- as most of the nation unwrapped gifts , ate big dinners or watched football games .
No holiday at the CIA ?
Glover was asked .
`` No , '' he answered .
`` We 're here -- whenever . ''
