MOSCOW --
Russia 's parliament on Wednesday set the date of early presidential elections on March 26 , but many politicians and analysts are n't expecting much of a race , calling Acting President Vladimir Putin the clear frontrunner .
A tough-talking former spy with a black-belt in judo , Putin grabbed the national spotlight IN September after Yeltsin named him his preferred successor and parliament approved him as Russia 's fifth prime minister in 17 months .
Putin , 47 , became sole leader of the country after Boris Yeltsin resigned unexpectedly as president on New Year 's Eve .
Since early autumn , when he was a virtual unknown , Putin 's approval rating has jumped from almost nothing to 80 percent , making him the most popular politician in Russia thanks to his decision to wage war against Islamic separatist rebels in the southern republic of Chechnya .
Kremlin officials appear smug with their boss 's chances to stay at the helm .
When asked by journalists whether Putin would win , the presidential deputy head of staff Igor Shabdurasulov said : `` This is very close to the truth . ''
So far , only three other politicians have thrown their hats in the ring for the presidential race , Gregory Yavlinsky , who heads the small , pro-reform party Yabloko in the State Duma , or lower house of parliament ; Yevgeny Primakov , a former prime minister under Yeltsin , whose political bloc also holds seats in the Duma ; and Vladimir Zhirinovsky , the flamboyant nationalist politician .
The Communist Party , which won the largest number of seats in the December Duma elections , is expected to name its candidate for the elections either Thursday or Friday , party leader Gennady Zyuganov told reporters .
Meanwhile , the All Russia political party , which ran an anti- Kremlin campaign in the Duma elections , threw its support Wednesday behind Putin 's candidacy .
`` This is indicative of which way the wind is blowing , '' said Nickolai Petrov , a political analyst at the Moscow Carnegie Center think tank .
`` It 's Putin 's election to lose .
The establishment wants him to win , and he has the tools to do it .
No other presidential hopeful has his resources . ''
The timing of Yeltsin 's resignation is expected to boost Putin 's chances in two ways .
First , presidential elections were originally to be held in the summer , but under the Constitution , when a president resigns , elections must be held within three months .
The shorter time period -- voted on by the Federation Council , or upper house of parliament -- makes it unlikely that the tide of the war could turn against the Russian army , and in turn , have public opinion turn against Putin , said Moscow political analyst Andrei Piontkovsky .
Government -run media is credited with helping Putin 's meteoric approval ratings .
Slavish coverage has been given to the tough-talking leader 's speeches in which he liberally sprinkles the message of a strong and influential Russia , while little coverage has been devoted to showing body bags of Russian soldiers killed in Chechnya .
Second , the time-frame throws potential competitors off balance .
Campaign coffers of other leading Russian politicians are nearly dry , after the six-month parliamentary campaign that ended with general elections on December 19 .
ENDIT
