OSLO , Norway
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Nobel Peace laureates John Hume and David Trimble , leaders of the efforts to end Northern Ireland 's three decades of sectarian violence , on Wednesday made a shared vow to overcome remaining obstacles to peace </ENAMEX>.
`` I see this honor as a very powerful statement of support for the peace process on our streets and that it will , in my opinion , strengthen the peace process enormously , '' said Hume , 61 , at a news conference at the Norwegian Nobel Institute a day before the prize is presented .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Hume leads the Social Democratic and Labor Party , Northern Ireland 's largest Roman Catholic party , and Hume heads the main Protestant grouping , the Ulster Unionist Party .
They were named winners of the prize for their work in pushing through an accord in April aimed at ending bloodshed between Catholics , who wanted Northern Ireland to become a part of the Irish Republic , and Protestants who want it to remain a part of the United Kingdom .</ENAMEX>
The presentation comes in the shadow of a dispute over Trimble 's party demanding that the outlawed Irish Republican Army begin to disarm before its political wing Sinn Fein is allowed to join a new governing body for Northern Ireland .
Both Nobel laureates admitted that difficulties remain , but said peace must succeed .
`` There is no crisis , '' said Trimble , who shook hands with Hume as they began their news conference .
`` I do n't accept that the process is running into trouble .
I know that it is not . ''
At roughly the same time in London , Sinn Fein 's chief negotiator Martin McGuinness said Trimble has `` dismally failed '' in following up the April peace accord .
McGuinness accused Trimble of provoking a crisis with his insistence that the IRA surrender its huge weapons stockpiles .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">In its October awards citation , the Nobel committee called Hume `` the clearest and most consistent of Northern Ireland 's political leaders in his work for a peaceful solution . ''</ENAMEX>
The citation praised Trimble for showing `` political courage ... at a critical stage in the process . ''
The latest dispute in peace process came last week with the Ulster Unionist Party 's demand for IRA disarmament before Sinn Fein could be recognized .
The April peace agreement called for Protestant and Catholic politicians forming a multiparty administration for Northern Ireland and joint policy-making bodies with the Irish Republic by October .
Neither of those steps have been taken .
Despite delays , Trimble said he expected the body to be in place in March or April .
Hume called the peace accord a watershed and said it was the duty of all parties to carry out the will of the people , since voters in both parts of Ireland had endorsed the plan in referendums .
`` A couple of years ago , who would have thought that the two governments and all the parties would have been in the same room in a totally peaceful atmosphere ?
. That in itself is a major progress given our past . ''
Hume said .
Hume said the people of Northern Ireland already felt safer , while Trimble said one remaining problem was the creation of a normal police force capable of dealing with the new danger of organized crime .
The laureates were just two of many involved in the peace process , including Sinn Fein leader Gerry Adams .
At the news conference , Trimble was asked how he expects peace to succeed when he refuses to even shake hands with Adams .
`` The original idea of a handshake is that someone offered us an empty hand to show there were no weapons in it .
I look forward to the time Mr. Adams and his associates are able to show an empty hand .
That time will come , '' Trimble said The Nobel Prizes , which include a 7.6 million Swedish kronor -LRB- dlrs 950,000 -RRB- award and a gold medal , are always presented on the Dec. 10 anniversary of the death of their benefactor , Alfred Nobel , a Swede who invented dynamite .
The peace prize is awarded in Oslo and the other prizes in Stockholm , Sweden .
-LRB- dm-jh -RRB-
