STOCKHOLM , Sweden
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
The winners of this year 's Nobel Medicine Prize on Monday eagerly told of the explosive interest in their discovery and tried to dampen controversy over whether another researcher should have received the prize .
`` It does everything , but most of what it does we do n't understand , '' said Ferid Murad , one of three Americans who share the 7.6-million-kronor -LRB- dlrs 950,000 -RRB- prize for their work on discovering the properties of nitric oxide , which acts as a blood-vessel dilator .
Murad 's statement might have sounded like a bit of forgivable hyperbole amid the high spirits of being in Stockholm for the presentation of the prestigious prize on Thursday .
But co-laureate Louis Ignarro talked in equally superlative terms .
`` I 've been involved in research for about 30 years and I 've never seen another area explode as this one has , '' he told a news conference that also included fellow laureate Robert Furchgott .
`` There 's so many new areas to explore with nitric oxide . ...
Very soon , we 'll be able to deal with the causes and novel therapeutic strategies for coronoary artery disease , for hypertension , for stroke , for vascular complications with diabetes , '' he said .
Murad added that he believed nitric oxide could soon be applied to relieving asthma suffering .
Ignarro 's use of the word `` explode '' resonates deeply in the Nobel festivities .
It was the laureates ' research that revealed that nitroglycerin relieves angina pectoris pains by releasing nitric oxide , and nitroglycerin is the key ingredient in dynamite , the explosive invented by Alfred Nobel who established the prizes in his will .
In fact , Nobel 's doctor had prescribed him to take nitroglycerin , but the Swedish inventor was skeptical , not having the advantage of the prize-winning research .
After the prize was announced in October , the decision to recognize the importance of nitric oxide , whose effects also play a role in the anti-impotence medicine Viagra , was widely approved of .
But some said Salvador Moncada should have been one of the laureates .
The criticism came from 1984 Nobel Medicine laureate Cesar Millstein and the medical faculty of the Moncada 's alma mater University of El Salvador , among others .
Moncada , now at the Wolfson Institute of the University College of London , was quoted in the Swedish newspaper Svenska Dagbladet last week as saying the prize was a shock .
`` I feel terrifically frustrated about the injustice .
It feels as if my life 's work has been stolen from me , '' the newspaper quoted him as saying .
Asked about the controversy , Ignarro said `` the Nobel committee , as always , have done their homework , '' but praised Moncada as `` a brilliant scientist who has made some contributions to this area . ''
The laureates ' work `` stimulated an avalanche of research ... and I would go so far as to say that Dr. Salvador Moncada led this avalanche . ''
The bodies that select the various Nobel Prize winners are bound not to comment on their decision-making processes , other than to state in citations why they believe the winners are deserving .
All the Nobel Prizes are presented on Dec. 10 , the anniversary of Nobel 's death .
The peace prize is awarded in Oslo , Norway , and the others in Stockholm .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">This year 's peace prize will be awarded to John Hume and David Trimble for their peace efforts in Northern Ireland</ENAMEX> .
Jose Saramago of Portugal won the literature prize .
The economics prize goes to Amartya Sen for his work in analyzing the causes behind famines and other work in the area of welfare economics .
Robert Laughlin , Horst Stormer and Daniel Tsui share the physics prize for discovering how electrons can change behavior .
The chemistry prize , for developing ways of analyzing molecules in reactions , is shared by John Pople and Walter Kohn .
-LRB- jh -RRB-
