OSLO , Norway
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- A half-dozen people in Norway now know who will win this year 's Nobel Peace Prize , to be awarded in about two weeks .
But as usual , the secretive members of the awards committee did n't give a hint following Wednesday 's final meeting .
`` We had our last regular meeting , and have reached a decision that will be announced on Oct. 13 , '' said Geir Lundestad , a non-voting secretary who attends the five-member awards committee 's meetings .
`` I 'll leave it at that . ''
The committee never even says who was nominated for the coveted prize , only the number of candidates -- a record 150 this year , with 115 individuals and 35 organizations .
`` We are pretty open , '' said Lundestad .
`` We said that we had our last meeting and picked a winner , and then expect to keep that to ourselves for more than two weeks . ''
Usually , they succeed , despite the efforts of avidly curious Nobel -watchers , mainly the news media , to guess the name of the winner .
`` We always watch the speculation with interest , '' said Lundestad .
This year 's prize includes a $ 968,000 cash award , plus a medal and a diploma .
The committee trims the list and adds its own nominations at its first meeting of each year .
Some candidates become publicly known when those making the nominations announce their favorites .
This year that includes President Clinton and former President Carter for wide-ranging peace efforts , as well as former U.S. Sen. George Mitchell for his efforts to resolve conflict in northern Ireland .
Other reported nominees are former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari and former Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin for their Balkan peace efforts ; South Korean President Kim Dae -jung for promoting good relations in Asia ; and such organizations as the Salvation Army , Human Rights Watch and various church groups .
An unusual nomination was for a town , northern Albania 's Kukes , for accepting 150,000 refugees during the Kosovo conflict .
In recent years , the committee has used the prize to encourage peace processes .
In 1998 , the prize went to Protestant David Trimble and Catholic David Hume to encourage the Northern Ireland peace talks .
In 1994 , the prize went to Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat and Israeli leaders Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres to help nurture the Middle East Peace process .
The prize also can recognize years of effort .
Last year , the award went to the humanitarian group Doctors Without Borders .
The Nobel Prizes always are presented Dec. 10 , the anniversary of the death of Alfred Nobel .
The Swedish industrialist endowed prizes for medicine or physiology , physics , chemistry , literature and peace in his 1896 will .
The prizes were first awarded in 1901 .
The peace prize , traditionally the last to be announced , is presented in Oslo , and the others in Stockholm , Sweden .
The winner of the prize for medicine or physiology will be announced Oct. 9 ; for physics and chemistry , Oct. 10 ; for economics , established and endowed by the Swedish national bank in 1968 and first awarded in 1969 , Oct. 11 .
The date for the literature prize winner to be announced has not been publicly disclosed .
If , like last year , it 's the Thursday before the other prizes , that would be Oct. 5 .
