NICOSIA , Cyprus
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Brinkmanship over Cyprus by traditional rivals Greece and Turkey has heightened tension once again on the divided island and served as a stark reminder of the potential for war in the eastern Mediterranean .
Greek and Turkish military planes visited the island last week in a show of force many saw as a prelude to the more dangerous deployment in October of Russian -made S -300 missiles in Cyprus .
The decision by the Greek Cypriot government to buy the anti-aircraft missiles has contributed considerably to a growing atmosphere of unease .
Turkey , which keeps 35,000 troops in northern Cyprus , has threatened to take military action to prevent their arrival , arguing their deployment poses a threat to its security .
`` In this missile crisis , no one wants to go to war but no one wants to back down either , '' said Aristos Aristotelous , a Greek Cypriot military analyst .
`` We are in a situation where everyone is trapped because of public statements on the missiles . ''
Cyprus has been divided into a Greek Cypriot south and Turkish -occupied north since Turkey invaded in 1974 after an abortive coup by supporters of union with Greece .
The breakaway Turkish Cypriot state in the north is recognized only by Turkey .
The role of Greece and Turkey as guardians of the island 's communities is enshrined in Cyprus ' constitution , and their involvement means any conflict has wider repercussions .
Both NATO allies , they last fought a war in the 1920s , but have come dangerously close several times since then , including more than once over Cyprus .
An outbreak of hostilities could split the U.S. -led Western alliance and further destabilize the already volatile Balkan region , where Turkish and Greek interests are often at odds .
Their rivalry took a dangerous turn on Tuesday when , in an unprecedented move , four Greek jets and two cargo planes landed at an air base recently built near the western town of Paphos for use by Greek forces in the event of a Turkish attack .
Turkey , which called the use of the base provocative , responded by sending six jets to an airstrip in the north .
They roared low over both the Greek and Turkish sectors of the capital , Nicosia -- so low the Turkish crescent could be seen on the plane 's wings .
`` It is a big problem for NATO , '' said Huseyin Bagci , a professor of international relations at Ankara 's Middle East Technical University .
He said NATO could not accept two member states behaving in such a way and speaking of war against each other .
A Turkish strike in October is possible , said Aristotelous , the military analyst , since Turkey 's powerful military could suffer a blow to its prestige if it does nothing .
But Western diplomats believe that military action is not the only option left to Turkey .
It also could try to further integrate northern Cyprus into the Turkish mainland -- a big fear of the Greek Cypriot government -- or permanently station Turkish jets in the north , said the diplomats , who spoke on condition of anonymity .
This week 's test of wills has worried Greek Cypriots , who opened membership negotiations with the European Union in March .
The tension caused share prices in the island 's fledgling stock market to shed about 2 percent on Thursday and Friday .
The decline brought to nearly 10 percent the market 's losses since early May , a drop traders attributed to the political uncertainty .
Several Cabinet ministers repeatedly have warned the local media that persistent coverage of the missile deal was hurting the economy , particularly tourism , which accounts for 20 percent of the gross national product and is the single biggest employer .
`` We had absolutely no intention of either causing a crisis or provoking anyone , '' Foreign Minister Yiannakis Cassoulides said Friday in a bid to defuse the tension .
`` There will be no more exercises with the participation of the Greek air force , at least in the foreseeable future , '' he said .
But the Greek Cypriot government remains adamant about going ahead with the deployment of the dlrs 380 million missiles .
It argues that it would only cancel the deal if tangible progress was made in efforts to reunite the island or if its longstanding proposals for demilitarization were accepted .
Both the United States and Britain have opposed the missile deal as unhelpful .
Thomas Miller , the U.S. State Department special coordinator for Cyprus , recently cast doubt on the missiles ' military value .
`` Two batteries of missiles are not going to even things up at all , '' he said in Nicosia .
The missiles , he added , would serve as a lightning rod for a Turkish attack rather than a deterrent .
