ISTANBUL , Turkey --
Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit of Turkey will visit Washington on Sept. 28 for talks with President Clinton that will probably lead to more American aid for earthquake relief , diplomats said Sunday .
Clinton is expected to broaden the agenda , however , and to encourage his Turkish counterpart to push ahead with tentative steps he has taken to improve Turkey 's human rights record and to build a positive relationship with Greece .
In what may be his most difficult effort , Clinton will also try to persuade Ecevit to seek a compromise with Greece over the divided island of Cyprus .
`` Both sides recognize that there is a need to correct past abuses and broaden democracy in Turkey , '' said an American diplomat who is helping to plan the meeting .
`` In important ways , progress in these areas affects how much we can do in other parts of the relationship .
`` Cyprus is also a limiting factor , '' the diplomat said .
`` We 're not directly linking progress on Cyprus with other issues , certainly not with help on earthquake reconstruction , but in the long run a failure to address the realities there is not going to serve Turkey 's long-term interest . ''
Planning for the Washington meeting began before the Aug. 17 earthquake , which killed more than 13,000 people and devastated a large area of northwestern Turkey .
The meeting was originally intended to give Clinton and Ecevit , who have never met , a chance to discuss regional issues including the Middle East peace effort , policy toward Iraq and American -backed plans to build an oil pipeline from the Caspian Sea across Turkey to the Mediterranean .
Since the quake , the agenda for the meeting has been broadened .
Clinton has promised to listen sympathetically to aid requests like those Ecevit will probably bring with him to Washington .
`` Turkey is our longtime ally , and the people of Turkey are our friends , '' Clinton said in a statement issued Saturday .
`` Now , with many of them in desperate need , we must do all we can to help , and we will . ''
Ecevit said Sunday that he would ask the United States to guarantee a bond issue to raise money for reconstruction .
Such a guarantee would lower the interest rate Turkey would have to pay to buyers .
`` If we can issue an earthquake bond backed by the United States , it will be a help in rapidly overcoming the economic problems caused by the earthquake , '' Ecevit said after a Cabinet meeting .
`` I hope the United States will approach this positively . ''
Although American officials said they were still uncertain what form additional earthquake relief might take , there is considerable support in the administration for enough generosity to reflect the value that the United States places on its friendship with Turkey .
`` The earthquake and our response to it served to highlight the excellent state of relations and the generally positive feelings both sides have about each other , '' a senior American official said .
`` It 's created a greater awareness of our importance to each other .
How far we can build on that to make progress in other areas remains to be seen . ''
Foreign Minister Ismail Cem of Turkey said his government was deeply grateful for American aid in earthquake relief , but he suggested that Ecevit was not prepared to accept guidance from Washington on political issues .
`` We are not really happy with the way the U.S. has been dealing with the Cyprus issue , so we 'll probably offer our views on that , '' Cem said in an interview .
`` As for human rights , the meetings are going to cover all issues , so that will probably come up , although we do n't have it as an agenda point .
`` The important thing to understand is that we are not going to Washington for some kind of inspection .
It 's a meeting between the heads of two friendly governments at a very interesting and positive moment . ''
Turkey is a member of NATO and has for decades been a close ally of the United States .
Military and security issues have traditionally been at the core of their relationship .
American efforts to provide military aid to Turkey , however , have often been blocked or modified by what some influential figures in Washington say is Turkey 's poor human rights record and its hostility to Greece .
Since the earthquake , spectacular progress has been made on improving Greek - Turkish relations .
In an interview published Sunday in Athens , <ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Foreign Minister George Papandreou of Greece said the outpouring of Greek sympathy for earthquake victims `` has created a new psychology '' and destroyed `` the myth that has been cultivated that Greeks and Turks cannot live side by side </ENAMEX>. ''
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright sent Papandreou a letter praising Greece 's attitude and encouraging him to `` build on this to continue to improve the bilateral relationship . ''
Turkey has also made at least tentative progress on human rights issues .
In recent days , Parliament has passed two laws that could lead to improvement in the human rights climate here .
One is a `` repentance law '' that will allow the authorities to offer amnesty to members of the Kurdish guerrilla army that has been waging war against the Turkish state for 15 years .
But the law was watered down in Parliament so that it applies only to low-ranking guerrillas who never took part in armed actions .
The second law offers amnesty to thousands of prisoners in Turkish jails .
It is expected to lead to the release of several rightist gunmen and , according to the Istanbul newspaper Milliyet , `` mafia gangs that have murdered , tortured and kidnapped . ''
Some Turks who supported the bill hope that it will also benefit intellectuals imprisoned for making speeches and writing articles deemed subversive .
A clause inserted by rightist members of Parliament , however , forbids the release of prisoners convicted of `` treason or crimes against the state . ''
That may mean that the law will not affect some of Turkey 's best-known prisoners , like the human rights advocate Akin Birdal ; Esber Yagmurdereli , a lawyer who is blind , and the Kurdish politician Leyla Zana .
Human rights groups in the United States have urged that all three be released , and they are expected to urge Clinton to bring up their cases with Ecevit when they meet .
