ATHENS , Greece --
The day after Athens was struck by its most serious earthquake in decades , millions of television viewers watched in awe as Turkish rescue workers pulled a Greek child from under a pile of rubble .
Announcers struggled to control their emotion .
`` It 's the Turks ! '' one of them shouted as his voice began to crack .
`` They 've got the little boy .
They saved him .
And now the Turkish guy is drinking from a bottle of water .
It 's the same bottle the Greek rescuers just drank from .
This is love .
It 's so beautiful . ''
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Although Greece and Turkey are both members of NATO , there are perhaps no two allied neighboring nations whose dealings have been marked with so much conflict and mistrust .
But in the last four weeks , their relations have improved with a spectacular suddenness that no one had expected</ENAMEX> .
Although serious political differences between the two countries still remain , both sides are now displaying a willingness to resolve them that they have not shown for generations .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Greek - Turkish relations had been improving slowly for several months , but it took earthquakes in both countries to push the two countries toward a more genuine friendship</ENAMEX> .
Each sent rescue teams to help the other , and their gestures were greeted by waves of ecstatic publicity and popular emotion .
`` I think we 're in the middle of a new phenomenon that you could call seismic diplomacy or earthquake diplomacy , '' said Nicholas Burns , the U. S. ambassador to Greece .
`` Images that people saw on TV had tremendous political symbolism , and there 's an opportunity for both sides to build on that . ''
Hardly a day now passes without a new sign of warmth between Greece and Turkey .
At the end of August , the commander of the Greek Navy traveled to Turkey , toured towns devastated by the Aug. 17 earthquake , and made a moving call for peace at a ceremony marking the retirement of his Turkish counterpart .
While he was there , a Greek naval vessel called at a Turkish port for the first time in more than a quarter-century .
Soon afterward , Greek and Turkish business leaders agreed to revive a cooperation council whose activities were suspended earlier this year in one of the periodic spats that have poisoned relations between the two countries .
Then , leading Greek and Turkish news commentators agreed to begin publishing their columns in each other 's newspapers .
At a meeting of European foreign ministers in Finland this month , Greece took the significant step of announcing that it would no longer block Turkey 's application for membership in the European Union .
On Thursday , teams of Greek and Turkish diplomats met in Athens to plan cultural exchanges and discuss cooperation in tourism , environmental protection , trade and other areas .
While they were meeting , Turks observed the anniversary of their 1922 military triumph over Greece with a restraint they had never shown before .
Normally the anniversary of the Turkish triumph at Smyrna , now known as Izmir , is marked by Turkish troops dressed in period costume who symbolically bayonet actors playing Greek soldiers , throw others into the sea and lustily tear down and trample a Greek flag .
This year , there was only a muted ceremony limited to a wreath-laying and playing of the national anthem .
`` I have been writing a ` Greek - Turkish ' piece almost every Sept. 9 for 25 years now , '' columnist Rauf Tamer wrote in the Istanbul newspaper Sabah .
`` I pulled them all out of the archives .
I tore them all up and threw them away .
I am now starting a new Sept. 9 series .
This is the real starting point , a fresh beginning , the first step toward the 21st century . ''
On Friday , President Costis Stephanopoulos of Greece was host of a reception in honor of Turkish earthquake relief workers , telling them that Greeks `` will always remember you with profound feelings of friendship . ''
The Greek Embassy in Ankara reported that a Turk had telephoned and offered to donate one of his kidneys to a Greek earthquake victim .
A Greek had made a similar gesture after the Turkish quake .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Tension between Greece and Turkey has not yet evaporated</ENAMEX> .
Each has recently embarked on a new , hugely expensive military buying spree that unsettles the other .
Turkey has made vague threats against Greek islands in the Aegean Sea .
Cyprus , divided since Turks invaded the north in 1974 , remains partitioned into ethnic Greek and Turkish sections , and the positions of Cypriot leaders , who are beholden to Athens or Ankara , remain rigid .
Asked last week about these problems , Foreign Minister George Papandreou of Greece replied : `` I do n't think that all of a sudden everything has been solved .
But a climate exists that could allow for a breakthrough on these issues . ''
Papandreou 's appointment as foreign minister this year was a key factor leading to the change in climate between Greece and Turkey .
His predecessor , Theodore Pangalos , was a flamboyant figure who denounced Turks as `` thieves and rapists . ''
But he fell from power in the scandal that followed the capture in February of the Kurdish rebel leader Abdullah Ocalan , who had been hiding in Kenya under the protection of Greek diplomats .
That episode stirred many Turks to emotional denunciations of Greece , and relations seemed to have reached a new low .
In retrospect , it may be seen as a positive turning point because it led to the emergence of Papandreou , a conciliator who evidently believes that he has a chance to change the course of his country 's history by ending its enmity with Turkey .
Papandreou shares much with his Turkish counterpart , Ismail Cem .
Both men are foreign-educated intellectuals who shun demagogic rhetoric .
They speak by telephone every few days .
In the past , Greek and Turkish foreign ministers often went months without speaking .
Despite their good personal relationship , both Papandreou and Cem must work within political constraints .
Papandreou 's party faces a national election next year , and if he is seen as surrendering too much to Turkey , political enemies may seek to portray him as weak and naive .
Cem must deal with militant nationalists in the coalition government he represents .
He also faces the harsh reality that in Turkey , key changes in foreign policy can be made only with the permission of military commanders .
Whether the commanders are ready to embrace Greece after generations of hostility remains uncertain .
`` The most important question is whether there can be change in Turkey , and the key to that is the military and its attitude toward civil society , '' said Thanos Veremis , a professor of political history at Athens University .
`` The Turkish military is highly conservative , and it wants to preserve its political power .
I frankly ca n't see how that logjam will break . ''
Veremis said Greeks would respond most positively to a statement from Turkey that it harbors no designs on Greek islands , especially if the statement came from a senior military commander like Gen. Huseyin Kivrikoglu , chief of the general staff .
`` People in Greece do n't pay attention to what Turkish politicians say , because we see that they do n't count , '' he said .
`` But if Kivrikoglu comes out and assures Greece that there 's never going to be war over the islands , that would go a long way because we know he 's the ultimate arbiter . ''
Regional developments in the last few months have helped bring Greece and Turkey closer together .
The two foreign ministers consulted regularly during the Kosovo crisis .
Their relationship may also have been strengthened by the recent easing of tension between Israel , a traditional friend of Turkey , and the Palestinians , whom Greece has long supported .
Another factor that has helped improve the political climate is the changing attitude of the Turkish and Greek press , both of which have for years sought to win readers and viewers by fanning the flames of chauvinistic nationalism .
Since the quake in Turkey last month , they have made an abrupt about-face , and are now vocal cheerleaders for the cause of peace .
Foreign governments are encouraging the countries ' new-found friendship , among them the Clinton administration .
President Clinton is to receive Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit of Turkey at the White House this month , and he is expected to visit both Turkey and Greece in November .
Soon after Clinton 's trip , the European Union will hold a crucial summit meeting in Helsinki .
Turkey is hoping that Greece will help persuade the 15-nation union , many of whose members have been critical of Turkey 's human rights record , to add Turkey to its list of prospective members .
If that does not happen , momentum toward Greek - Turkish friendship may be slowed .
`` The naysayers are lying in wait , and unless there 's real progress , hardliners on both sides will try to undermine this process , '' warned David Philips , a specialist in conflict resolution who has been hired by the State Department to suggest ways of bringing Greeks and Turks together .
`` That 's why it 's so important that the leaders of both countries understand the importance of this moment and seize the opportunity that 's staring them in the face . ''
