ISTANBUL , Turkey --
With Greece and Turkey suddenly seeming ready to end generations of hostility , Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit of Turkey is due in Washington on Sunday for talks this week with President Clinton and congressional leaders .
Clinton is expected to raise a series of issues with his guest , ranging from trade to human rights .
But the prospect of finally bringing peace to the volatile eastern Mediterranean will be at the top of his agenda .
Ecevit was prime minister when Turkey sent troops to Cyprus in 1974 , and since then he has been a hero to nationalists .
Now back in power at 74 , he may be in a position to lead his country toward friendship with Greece and possibly even resolution of the Cyprus dispute .
If Clinton can encourage Ecevit in this direction , he may be able to claim the outcome as a great foreign policy success .
The two , who have never met , are to hold talks at the White House on Tuesday .
On Wednesday , Ecevit is to travel to New York for meetings with Turkish - American groups and with foreign leaders attending the U.N. General Assembly .
Turkey 's industrial heartland was devastated by an earthquake last month , and the administration is preparing a package of relief aid intended to show American commitment to Turkey , which has for decades been a NATO ally and key strategic partner .
In the past , American efforts to help Turkey have been hobbled by the campaigns of anti- Turkish lobbies , including those sponsored by Greeks and Greek - Americans .
But for the first time in living memory , that climate has changed .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Greece sent generous relief aid to Turkey after the Aug. 17 earthquake , provoking an emotional wave of gratitude .
Relations between the countries warmed even further when Turkish relief teams flew to Greece after an earthquake struck Athens three weeks later</ENAMEX> .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">This new detente appears to be widely popular in both countries , but there are skeptics .
One of them , a former Turkish foreign minister , Mumtaz Soysal , recently published a column in an Istanbul newspaper warning against `` idiotic optimism '' and asking , `` Do you want us unilaterally to surrender our vital interests in the Aegean and Cyprus in the name of friendship</ENAMEX> ? ''
That question is also being asked within Ecevit 's coalition government , which includes a rightist party that has traditionally appealed to chauvinistic nationalism .
It may prove difficult for Ecevit to consolidate the new Greek - Turkish friendship , and especially to end the impasse over Cyprus , which since 1974 has been divided between Greek and Turkish sectors .
`` We have a fairly strong view that there will never be a better time to deal with this issue , '' said an administration authority on Cyprus .
`` Their position is that the time is n't ripe and that there 's no rush .
But Ecevit has an interest in seeing that Cyprus does n't spoil the tone of this visit and become the only headline that comes out of it .
So far , though , he is n't signaling much flexibility . ''
Rights issues are also likely to figure in the talks .
Influential figures in Washington , including members of Congress with whom Ecevit is expected to meet , have said that Turkey must improve its human rights record if it wants to be considered a full member of the club of Western democracies .
European countries have also been vocal in pressing Turkey to end rivalry with Greece , settle the Cyprus dispute , root out rights abuses and resolve the 15-year Kurdish conflict .
The European Union may decide at its December summit meeting whether Turkey becomes a candidate for membership -- which largely depends on Turkey 's success in confronting these problems .
`` Europe has a tendency to look at Turkey without seeing the nuances at all , and is constantly undermining the reform forces here , '' said Soli Ozel , a professor of international relations at Bilgi University in Istanbul .
`` The Americans are n't like that .
They see that Ecevit is making progress , even if it is slow .
So unless there 's a crackup over Cyprus , the visit should go well . ''
