ANKARA , Turkey --
Four years after Greece and Turkey came to the brink of war over their competing claims to a barren islet in the Aegean Sea , their foreign ministers met here Thursday to sign a series of accords and pledge themselves to peace .
Foreign Minister Ismail Cem of Turkey called the accords `` a successful beginning toward a new era in relations between our two countries . ''
`` These give me hope because I believe we can do many more things together , '' Cem said .
`` The new relationship will have positive effects not only on Greece and Turkey , but will also have positive results in better security , faster development and democratization in the region . ''
One of the accords signed Thursday regulates commerce between the two countries by guaranteeing that investments will be protected and that investors will not be subject to double taxation .
The other four accords provide for cooperation in fighting organized crime , preventing illegal immigration , promoting tourism and protecting the Aegean environment .
Before the signing ceremony , Foreign Minister George Papandreou of Greece met with Turkey 's prime minister , Bulent Ecevit .
At the meeting , Ecevit conveyed an invitation to his Greek counterpart , Prime Minister Costas Simitis , to visit Turkey .
Simitis faces national elections this spring .
His government must walk a fine political line , building a new relationship with Turkey without seeming to compromise vital Greek interests .
`` We want to move forward in the quickest way possible to solve all issues that divide us , but I would suggest that we proceed with the same caution and sensitivity which we have had in the last two months , '' Papandreou said .
`` Now we have to build on this , again with caution but also with new optimism and dynamism . ''
The ministers are expected to sign three more accords next month when Cem visits Athens .
They are also discussing new forms of cooperation , ranging from limits on their military maneuvers in the Aegean to the possibility of jointly hosting the European soccer championships in 2008 .
`` The content of these agreements is not so important , '' said Hikmet Cetin , a former Turkish foreign minister .
`` What 's important is that people in Turkey , Greece and Cyprus now see that the two governments can deal with each other in a positive way . ''
Greece and Turkey have a long history of enmity , and relations have been frigid for most of the last quarter-century , since Turkey 's dispatch of troops to Cyprus in 1974 , which led to the island 's division into Turkish and Greek sectors .
Since then , Athens and Ankara have argued bitterly not only about Cyprus , but also about rights to the airspace over the Aegean and the seabed beneath it .
In early 1996 , the Clinton administration stepped in to restrain Greece and Turkey from fighting over a 10-acre Aegean islet of rocky outcroppings inhabited by goats , which Greeks call Imia and Turks call Kardak .
The rivalry has persisted despite both countries ' being members of the NATO alliance .
It has caused considerable strains within NATO .
The United States has sought repeatedly , though so far unsuccessfully , to bring the two sides together .
What successive American presidents failed to do was accomplished last year through a series of unforeseen events .
In February , the Kurdish rebel leader Abdullah Ocalan , whose guerrillas had been fighting the Turkish army for 14 years , was captured in Kenya while under the protection of Greek diplomats .
The resulting scandal led to the resignations of Greece 's hard-line foreign minister and several intelligence officers who were considered strongly anti- Turkish .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Later in the year , Turkey and Greece were both struck by major earthquakes , and each country sent aid to the other .
The quakes became powerful reminders that the two nations share both geography and destiny</ENAMEX> .
Last month Greece withdrew its objection to Turkish membership in the European Union .
As a result , the union named Turkey an official candidate for membership , setting off a wave of jubilation here .
`` There is never going to be a better time than now to solve our disagreements , '' Cetin said .
`` You have a very reasonable government in Greece .
You 've got an American president who 's in his last year in office and would love to see this done before he retires .
And you 've got a Turkish leader who has always been tough on the Cyprus issue , so no one can accuse him of selling out Cyprus . ''
`` We 've gone through a great stage of symbolism in Greek - Turkish friendship , '' Cetin continued .
`` Now it 's very critical that we move quickly to the real tough problems , which are Cyprus and the Aegean . ''
