ISTANBUL , November 18 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Turkish Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit and his Greek counterpart Costas Simitis met here Thursday afternoon and pledged to deepen bilateral cooperation .
The meeting was held on the sidelines of the on-going Summit of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe , which was held in the largest city of Turkey on Thursday and Friday .
Speaking to reporters after the meeting , Ecevit said his country and Greece should let the United Nations and the two parties of Cyprus deal with the Cyprus problems , a standing source of tension between Athens and Greek , and enhance ties between the two long-time rival neighbors .
`` There is not a problem between Greece and Turkey that is difficult to resolve , '' he said .
`` But I believe we should not add the Cyprus question to these issues , '' he added .
Simitis said that during the stay in Turkey he saw the wish of the Turkish people to develop friendly ties with the Greek people .
`` We need to take this into account and strive to establish a lasting and stable peace in the area , '' he added .
He said the Greek aid to Turkey , which began after a killer earthquake in northwestern Turkey on August 17 , would continue , and that Greece would send 150 prefabricated homes for thousands of Turks made homeless by that quake and its after-shocks .
The two countries have been locked for decades in disputes over various problems including Cyprus , territorial disputes and ethnic problems .
Cyprus has been divided into the Greek Cypriot -controlled south and the Turkish Cypriot -dominated north since 1974 when Turkish troops invaded and took over the northern third of the island after a failed pro- Athens coup in Nicosia , which was orchestrated by the then Greek junta .
A breakaway Turkish Cypriot state was announced in 1983 and is only recognized by Ankara , which maintains 35,000 troops on the northern part of the island .
Besides Cyprus , the two countries also have territorial disputes over air space and sea limits in the Aegean .
They nearly went into war three years ago after both claimed ownership of an uninhabited tiny island in the sea .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">However , relations between them appeared to be thawing recently after both countries lent helping hands to each other when earthquakes rocked both countries separately in the past three months</ENAMEX> .
