ATHENS , October 5 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Greek Prime Minister Costas Simitis Tuesday urged neighboring Turkey to translate the unprecedented good climate in Greek - Turkish relations into deeds and decisions which would create a solid foundation for the improvement of bilateral ties .
Speaking at the ruling Panhellenic Socialist Movement 's parliamentary group , Simitis said that such deeds and decisions had not yet been forthcoming , but expressed the hope that Turkey would take a substantial step to advance its European vocation and support efforts being made for closer cooperation , the semi-official Athens News Agency -LRB- ANA -RRB- reported .
An impetus had been created that had given the neighboring country the dilemma of choosing between peace and cooperation or a gradual distancing from European structures and marginalization , he said .
The premier stressed that Athens believed in Turkey 's European vocation but this entailed both rights and responsibilities .
Greek government spokesman Dimitris Reppas also noted at a press briefing that for Turkey to be included in an EU candidate country , it must fall into line with the decisions taken at the EU summits in Luxembourg and Cardiff .
He said that in this case , Greece would have no objection to upgrading relations between the EU and Turkey .
Greece and Turkey have nearly gone to war three times in the past 25 years for their disputes in the territorial waters , air space limits , the delimitation of the continental shelf in the Aegean Sea and the Cyprus problem .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Greece has insisted that Turkey cannot join the EU unless it improves its human rights record and relations with Greece as well as not blocking Cyprus 's accession to the EU .
The recent devastating earthquakes in Turkey and Greece have provided the two neighbors a good chance to improve their strained ties .</ENAMEX>
Greece has since softened its opposition to Turkey 's eventual membership in the EU. On Monday , Greece and Germany agreed to find ways to help Turkey become a possible candidate country for the EU by the Helsinki summit in December .
