ATHENS , January 21 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Greece 's new government , led by Costas Simitis and will be sworn in Monday , is facing pressing challenges to resolve the country 's hard issues both at home and across the border .
Simitis , a 59-year -old veteran party official and former minister of industry and commerce , was elected new prime minister by the ruling Panhellenic Socialist Movement -LRB- PASOK -RRB- parliamentary group Thursday to replace the bed-ridden Andreas Papandreou who resigned as premier last Monday .
What the new government has to do first is to speed up the nation 's economic reform to meet with the European Union 's convergence goals .
According to local press reports , Simitis is determined to pursue an austerity economic policy , to reduce the public deficit by cutting public expenditure .
Big changes are also expected on the boards of state companies and banks , with old PASOK faithfuls , many of whom owe their jobs to political patronage , expected to be sidelined in favor of professional technocrats under Simitis ' promised reforms .
The new government will also be tested in its foreign policy on a number of sensitive issues .
U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Richard Holbrooke is expected in Athens early next month to discuss the ongoing U.N. -led negotiations on the crucial issue of the name of the neighboring Macedonia as well as new U.S. initiative on the long-standing Cyprus issue .
The strain relations with neighboring Turkey has long been regarded as one of the most sensitive and difficult aspects in the country 's foreign policy .
Political observers noted that any mishandling of the issue would cost the government dearly .
As the only country in the Balkans with a membership of both the NATO and the EU , Greece is also trying to work out a policy which would enbale it to play a more active role in the turbulent region .
Analysts agree that Simitis will enjoy a brief honeymoon , from both the party and media .
But he must take a strong showing at the PASOK congress expected to be held in the middle of this year and prove himself a dynamic and effective premier before the next general elections in 1997 .
