CAIRO , January 10 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The past year saw the realignment of Middle East countries , based on their strategic considerations , and in pursuit of their national interests .
Most eye-catching was the fast growing political and military rapport between Israel , Turkey and Jordan , despite the opposition of most of the Islamic countries in the region .
In January 1998 , Israel and Turkey , together with the United States , staged a naval exercise in the Mediterranean Sea , to test in their words the ability of `` search and rescue . ''
This was a drastic move since the Israel and Turkey clinched a couple of deals on military cooperation about a year before .
Alarmed by the coalescence , the regional countries mainly blamed the predominantly Muslim , but politically secular Turkey for betraying and harming the interests of the Islamic world .
Despite their outcry , Jordan , which sit next to Israel and had been versed in adjusting itself to the changing climate over the past years , had no hesitation in going ahead with sending its navy commander as an observer to the drill .
This incident underlined the ongoing process of realignment in the region that had been dreamed for by Israel for years .
The Jewish state , concerned about its security in the midst of Arab neighbors , had been pondering whether it can win another Middle East war without aid from outside the region .
Although Israel has military superiority in the region , its strategists found the answer to the question was negative .
The small country needed to break the Arab isolation as much as it desired to have a couple of strategic friends in an otherwise hostile environment .
Turkey proved to be an ideal pal .
It was a member of the Western military bloc ; it had loose ties with the Arabs and strained relations with Iran and Syria , both are Israel 's enemies ; and it had a very powerful pro- U.S .
military that guarded against Islamic fundamentalism .
Turkey , on the other hand , also expected benefit from the closeness with Israel .
Its relations with some European Union nations marred over a series of disputes , Turkey was eager to be on better terms with the U.S. , as was the case during the Cold War .
Ankara understood that an alliance with Israel was in fact a coalition with the U.S.. Not only was Turkey assured of Israeli assistance in improving its military equipment , it now could look to the U.S. for modern and advanced weapons and aircraft .
The U.S. also threw its weight behind a proposed pipeline that cut across Turkey to bring Central Asian oil and gas to world markets , although this would prove to be an economically unwise option compared with routes through Russia or Georgia .
This pipeline could give Turkey less expensive energy , more revenues and most importantly , a louder say in Central Asian affairs .
In addition , Turkey needed U.S. help in solving its problem of Kurds , who had been fighting for an independent homeland in southeastern Turkey for more than a decade .
There were fears that U.S. support for the autonomy of Iraqi Kurds would embolden Turkish Kurds to reaffirm their cause .
To Washington , an Israeli - Turkish synergy added a welcome factor in containing its avowed enemies , such as Iran and Iraq , and ensuring its interests in the region .
Jordan , regarded by the U.S. as a mild Arab country , was also helpful .
The U.S. upped its annual economic aid to Jordan to 225 million U.S. dollars in 1998 and praised its role in the Mideast peace process , now being halted again by Israel 's hardline prime minister , Benjamin Netanyahu .
Most sensitive to the Israel - Turkey - Jordan alliance were their close neighbors - Iran , Iraq and Syria , who viewed it as being directed against themselves and a threat to regional security and stability .
The alliance would further tip the balance of power in the region to Israel 's favor , they believed .
The three countries , though bitterly at odds with each other over a number of issues , had tried to patch up sort of common front as a counter-weight .
Iran and Iraq , who fought an eight-year war in the 1980s in which about 1 million people on both sides were killed or wounded , were trying to bury their past .
They exchanged prisoners of war and swapped remained of dead soldiers for reconciliation .
Iran had showed sympathy toward the sanction-stricken Iraq , opposing U.S. military actions against it and attempts to disintegrate it .
There was a breakthrough in relations between Iraq and Syria , who sided with Iran during the Iran - Iraq war , and the two stopped trading accusation , shut down radio stations of each other 's oppositions , resumed trade links and economic ties and exchange high-level visits .
Syria said it was willing to reopen an oil pipeline closed nearly two decades ago to transport Iraqi oil to the Mediterranean , and prepared to work with Iraq on a new pipeline with a shipping capacity of 1.4 million barrels a day .
Seizing the opportunity to cash in on the new situation , Tehran had been more active in drumming up support from regional countries .
Its new president , Mohammed Khatami , a moderate cleric , strived to improve relations with Gulf Arabs , and put this as a priority of his foreign policy .
Iran 's foreign minister , Kamal Kharrazi , toured all six member nations of the Gulf Cooperation Council that supported Iraq during its war with Iran , and eased tensions with them .
Its former President Hashemi Rafsanjani visited Saudi Arabia , the heavy-weight in the region , to restore political relations and develop economic cooperation .
A number of deals were inked , and the two sides agreed to coordinate in keeping oil prices from falling , which was unthinkable even a year earlier .
In the meantime , Iran also tried to mend fences with Egypt , a prominent figure in the Arab world .
Their foreign ministers exchanged visits and a possible upgrading of diplomatic ties was in the air .
Perhaps it was too early to say of what the Iran - Iraq - Syria front would exactly be up to in the future , but surely it represented a desire and an attempt to make up for the strategic unequilibrium in the region .
Other countries , like Lebanon , Libya and Sudan , could be supporters of this effort .
The Middle East had long been a place of shifting alliance and recurring conflicts .
But the realignment that is in the making indeed merits due attention .
