ANKARA , April 17 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The United States Friday expressed its hope that Turkey and Greece would settle their disputes in a peaceful way , local TV reports said .
U.S. Secretary of Defense William Cohen , who arrived here Friday on a two-day official visit , said that a peaceful relationship between Ankara and Athens will be in the interests of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization -LRB- NATO -RRB- of which Turkey and Greece are members .
`` It is our hope and expectation that the tensions ... will be settled and negotiated in a way that is responsible as members of the NATO allies , '' Cohen told a joint press conference held with his Turkish counterpart Ismet Sezgin following their meeting .
Cohen stressed that both Turkey and Greece are important allies of the U.S. and they will be treated without discriminations .
Washington will provide equal military support to Turkey and Greece , which will make the two gain the capability of defending themselves as well as carrying out duties as NATO member states , he said .
As traditional rivals , Turkey and Greece have long be at odds over some issues including air space limits , sea-bed mineral rights , sovereignty of some islets in the Aegean Sea .
The bitter Turco - Greek relationship is a headache for the NATO which is afraid that such a state would weaken the collective defense of the military bloc in the southeastern Europe .
Sezgin , for his part , said that Turkey has never had an intention to use force against Greece in order to solve its disputes with the neighboring country .
`` We are in favor of peace and friendship and hope to modernize our forces to ensure peace and stability in the region , '' he said .
As to Turkey 's attitude toward the NATO eastward expansion , Cohen said that it 's the U.S. hope that Turkey will take a positive position regarding this issue .
The Turkish government had said that whether Turkey supports this project should be up to the Parliament under the Constitution , indicating that the NATO efforts to admit new members might be obstructed .
Local analysts noted that Ankara took such an attitude because its bid for full membership of the European Union -LRB- EU -RRB- was denied by some leading European nations which are also NATO members .
Cohen met with Turkish Prime Minister Mesut Yilmaz Friday morning and was received by Turkish President Suleyman Demirel late Friday afternoon .
They exchanged views over the measures to further strengthen U.S. - Turkish relations .
Although both Cohen and Sezgin denied that Turkey had made the requirement of purchasing advanced U.S. weapons , diplomatic sources here believe that enhancing Turkish - U.S. cooperation in the defense field is a major topic of the discussion .
The U.S. secretary of defense will fly to the Incirlik air base near Adana in southern Turkey to inspect the U.S. troops stationed there to carry out the mission of Operation Northern Watch designed to monitor northern Iraq .
Cohen will leave Turkey late Saturday to continue his Mideast trip which will also take him to Jordan , Egypt , Israel as well as Greece .
