ISLAMABAD , March 13 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- A `` thawing '' in the strained relations between Pakistan and India is expected as the two South Asian countries are to resume their foreign secretary-level talks later this month after a span of over three years .
The four-day foreign secretary-level talks , scheduled for March 28-31 in the Indian capital of New Dehli , are the eighth of its kind between the two countries .
The talks , which remain suspended since January 1994 , are aimed at paving the way for a meaningful dialogue between the Foreign Ministers of the two countries early next month in New Delhi and eventually a summit meeting between the top executive heads of the two sub-continental states on the sidelines of the South Asian Summit in the Maldives in May .
The major initiative taken by the two countries towards a rapprochement is widely welcomed by the international community .
It is the first time in the last three years that Pakistan and India have expressed their determination to break the current impasse in the bilateral ties .
What is most encouraging is that neither Pakistan nor India this time has laid down any pre-conditions for the talks , analysts here noted .
The imposition of preconditions has made such talks fruitless in the past , they said .
Their approaches to the issue of preconditions are seen as practical .
The last round of foreign secretary-level talks held in Islamabad on January 1-3 , 1994 failed to make any headway due to the `` basic divergences '' between the two countries on the issue of Jammu and Kashmir .
The unconditional resumption of high-level talks reflects the growing pragmatism in the attitude and mind-set of the leaderships of Pakistan and India , as peace and development have become the major trends in today 's world , the analysts said .
An improvement in the long strained bilateral relations between Pakistan and India is an economic necessity for both countries and for the South Asian region as a whole , they said .
Economic matters , particularly cooperation in the fields of commerce and trade for common development , have acquired a top priority in international relations today .
And there is a compelling need for those developing countries like Pakistan and India to spend less on armaments and more on social and economic development .
Since the inception of Pakistan and India , the two countries have fought three wars , two of which were triggered off by the Kashmir problem .
Half a century on , the two countries are still locked in confrontation over the issue .
This insecurity has been lingering on as successive governments of the two countries have diverted valuable resources , which should have been used to end poverty and social injustice , to an arms race .
The tension between Pakistan and Indian has also had a destabilizing effect on the whole South Asian region .
The instability in the region has not only frustrated economic powers in their efforts to increase investments , but also obstructed the development of the South Asia Association for Regional Cooperation -LRB- SAARC -RRB- , of which both Pakistan and India are members , analysts said .
Improved bilateral ties and the signing of a no war pact between Pakistan and India could make the investment environment friendly in the region and help attract large amounts of foreign capital which is badly needed by the two countries in developing their national economies .
Foreign investments in Pakistan , which is eager to get rid of the ever worsening debt crisis , have remained at a relatively low level due mainly to two reasons : regional insecurity and domestic political instability .
As for the pro-business government of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif , it is facing increasing pressure to open up trade extensively with India .
Observers noted that Pakistan would benefit most from expansion of trade with India as many raw materials from India are cheaper in terms of price and freight rates , which can help reduce the production cost and give Pakistani businessmen a competitiveness edge in prices on international markets .
In addition , many of the items Pakistan is importing from other countries are available in India at much cheaper rates , which helps in saving its limited foreign exchange .
The general public in both countries wishes for better ties and favors an armed conflict-free relationship , despite deep suspicions on both sides .
But the analysts added that the resumption of bilateral talks is by no means a guarantee for a speedy solution to the Kashmir issue .
Major issues between the two countries remain unresolved .
What the international community is following with interest is that whether Pakistan and India would lay the Kashmir issue aside for a while and concentrate in stead on other issues including economic cooperation .
Analysts have cautioned people against expecting too much from the forthcoming talks in view of the previous talks which all ended up fruitless .
However , the resumption of talks this time is seen as a practical and forward-looking step taken by the governments of Pakistan and India in the direction of finding a just , lasting and mutually satisfactory solution to all the pending issues between them , the analysts said .
