ANKARA , April 11 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- As the Pan - Hellenic Socialist Movement -LRB- PASOK -RRB- led by Greek Prime Minister Costas Simitis retained power by a narrow majority in last weekend 's general election , Turkey reacted mixedly as to the prospect of bilateral relations .
Uncertainties are ostensible in Turkey over whether Simitis ' new government will give green light to bilateral military dialog or attempt to gain time by relying on the European Union policies concerning the resolution to Aegean and Cyprus disputes .
Turkey and Greece have been long in disputes over Aegean Sea territories and Cyprus issue .
Cyprus has been divided since Turkey invaded and occupied the northern third of the island country in 1974 in the wake of a failed pro- Athens coup .
Relations between the two countries broke the ice last year when they rushed to aid their earthquaking neighbor and the rapprochement trended was reinforced by ensuing high-level exchange of visits .
The uncertainties stemmed from last year 's EU Helsinki summit , which accepted Turkey as a candidate for a full membership but requested Ankara to settle its disputes with the EU member Greece before 2004 .
An unofficial deadline as it is , it means the ball was thrown in Turkey 's court over the Aegean Sea and Cyprus issues , which thus invited the prediction that Athens would play the EU card against Ankara .
The two countries embrace different perceptions of the 2004 deadline set by the EU .
Ankara got a letter of assurance from Finland , which was then holding the EU rotating presidency , that solving bilateral disputes was not a precondition for Turkey 's EU membership .
But for Greece , the year 2004 might be viewed as the deadline for Turkey to resolve its disputes with Athens which claimed that it is now Ankara 's responsibility .
During his election campaign , Simitis implied that he will seek a solution on disputes with Turkey through the EU , which fuelled Turkey 's worry that Athens may pursue a policy of shrinking its efforts in the coming years toward the dispute solution .
Turkish diplomatic sources were cautious about politicians ' campaign platforms while waiting for the policies of Greek new government .
In addition , Turkish military and diplomats alike are uncertain whether Aegean disputes are going to be solved through bilateral negotiations .
Some analysts said that it will become clear in the coming days or months how far Simitis is willing to further political dialog with Turkey as nine agreements , signed during exchanges of visits by the two countries ' foreign ministries , will be discussed in the new Greek cabinet and parliament .
Professor Hasan Koni , from Ankara University 's Political Science Department , believed that victory of the now-defeated opposition New Democracy Party would have had a much better impact on the resolution of military problems between Turkey and Greece .
`` In essence , the Pan - Hellenic Socialist Movement is more a nationalist than a leftist party .
Whereas New Democracy Party is a liberal-right party with strong backing from businessmen , it would be more prepared for solving military issues and highlighting the commercial aspect of relations , '' Koni argued .
He said that Simitis might seek support from the EU on disputes with Turkey , rather than establish bilateral military dialog .
But some other Turkish experts , however , expressed optimistic about the prospect of relations with Greece , believing Simitis will go ahead with his detente policies toward Ankara .
Professor Hasan Unal , from Bilkent University in Ankara , said that there was no reason to expect that Simitis ' new cabinet would change its stance toward Turkey , since rapprochement has been beneficial for it .
