ANKARA , January 26 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Although the freezing Turko - Greek ties is thawing after Greek Foreign Minister George Papandreou visited Ankara last week , some pending disputes between the two neighbors dampened hopes for normal ties .
During his stay in Ankara , the first official visit by a Greek foreign minister since 1962 , Papandreou signed agreements for cooperation in combatting terrorism and organized crimes , as well as deals on tourism , environment and the protection of investments .
The agreements were designed to build confidence between the two sides before the tackling of two core issues , namely , the territorial dispute over the Aegean Sea and the Cyprus issue .
The visit was hailed by Ankara as another milestone in the rapprochement process of bilateral ties , which had been mostly characterized as `` hostile '' .
However , analysts here warned that Ankara has to wait and see when the two sides start to deal with the above-mentioned issues which have brought the two Aegean neighbors to the brink of war three times during the past 25 years .
Turkey also intervened militarily on the island of Cyprus in 1974 to prevent Greek Cypriots from uniting with Greece through a coup .
The fact that Turkey cannot make any further concessions over the two disputes may lead the two countries to freeze their ties , said critics here .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Turkey and Greece have improved relations steadily since the two sides rushed aid to each other following the devastating earthquakes which shocked the two countries last summer .
Last month , Greece dropped its long-standing objection to Turkey 's candidacy for the European Union -LRB- EU -RRB- membership</ENAMEX> .
In return , Turkey agreed that Cyprus could eventually join the EU , and also agreed to possible international arbitration of some territorial disputes if the two sides fail to solve them by 2004 .
During his visit , Papandreou also pledged to help push for Turkey 's EU membership .
