ANKARA , April 25 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Turkey 's Chief of General Staff of the Armed Forces Huseyin Kivrikoglu has urged Greece to come up for a military dialogue with Ankara , reported Turkish Daily News on Tuesday .
`` Our aim is to reduce tension with Greece , '' explained the Turkish military leader .
Kivrikoglu issued the call at a reception held on Sunday evening marking the National Sovereignty and Children 's Day , which falls on Sunday .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">He stressed the necessity to set up a dialogue mechanism between the militaries of the two countries so as to relax tensions in the Aegean Sea .
Greece and Turkey , two NATO allies which are locked in disputes over Cyprus and the Aegean Sea for decades , cashed in on the mutual sympathy produced by devastating earthquakes in the two countries last summer in a process dubbed earthquake diplomacy .</ENAMEX>
The new rapprochement was furthered by an exchange of historic visits of the foreign ministers of the two countries earlier this year .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">However , none of the nine agreements signed during the visits addressed the core disputes that have kept tensions high for years</ENAMEX> .
It was reported that with the conclusion of Greek elections bringing the ruling PASOK back to power , there are concerns in Ankara over whether the new Greek government will give the green light to bilateral military dialogue between the two Aegean neighbors .
Greek Prime Minister Costas Simitis reiterated over the weekend that the only problem Greece has with Turkey is the determination of the continental shelf in the Aegean Sea .
In his speech to the Parliament about his new government 's program , bilateral relations with Turkey in particular , Simitis declared that the address for the resolution of the dispute is no other than the International Court of Justice at the Hague .
Kivrikoglu disputed Simitis ' statement by saying that `` from the very beginning they have seen the continental shelf as the sole problem between Turkey and Greece awaiting resolution .
We say there are four or five issues . ''
`` If one side pulls in one direction and the other in the opposite then we will go nowhere , '' he added .
An unidentified senior general also attending the reception told the paper that Simitis ' announcement is a step backward in meeting Turkish demands .
Turkey has always held that there are five major points of contention between Turkey and Greece , including the continental shelf , the armament of the Aegean islands , the status of certain Aegean islands , the Turkish population of Greece 's western Thrace and air space over the Aegean .
The Turkish side does not consider the Cyprus dispute to fall within the framework of Turkish - Greek relations .
All eyes are now on the scheduled meeting between Turkish Foreign Minister Ismail Cem and his Greek counterpart George Papandreou , due to be held in New York on May 2 , during which both ministers will receive the `` Statesman of the Year '' award from the U.S. -based East - West Institute for their contribution to the Turkish - Greek political dialogue .
It is speculated here that Cem and Papandreou , architects of the rapprochement between Turkey and Greece , will reach an understanding to pave the way for further improvement of relations .
