ANKARA , March 21 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- The Turkish military is increasingly impatient about the little progress in dialogue between Greece and Turkey on the deep-rooted issue of sovereignty rights in the Aegean Sea , Turkish Daily News reported on Tuesday .
The Turkish Armed Forces -LRB- TSK -RRB- is unhappy about the fact that the Greek side has so far failed to initiate a dialogue on basic military and security issues in spite of a political rapprochement between the two NATO allies , said the report .
Senior Turkish military officers recently lodged complaints to the United States , which has on one hand put pressure on both countries for a peaceful settlement of their disputes , and on the other hand has been arming both Ankara and Athens under the pretext of balancing the military might of the two rival Aegean neighbors .
The TSK has also warned Washington that a new tension between Turkey and Greece may be brewing because the risk of dog fights between fighter jets coming from opposite directions in the Aegean airspace is on the rise .
Pilots might open fire out of miscalculation of the other side 's intentions .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Greece and Turkey , locked in disputes over the Aegean Sea and Cyprus , cashed in on the mutual sympathy produced by devastating earthquakes in their two countries last summer in a process dubbed earthquake diplomacy</ENAMEX> .
The rapprochement was furthered when Greek Foreign Minister George Papandreou and his Turkish counterpart Ismail Cem exchanged visits to each other 's country early this year .
Nine agreements were signed between the two countries in areas such as tourism , trade and counter-terrorism .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">However , the thorny issues that have fundamentally marred the relations between the two neighbors were not touched on</ENAMEX> .
It is widely believed that Athens will not make any initiative before the April 9 elections in Greece and the Turkish side will accordingly adopt a wait-and-see attitude .
