ANKARA , September 18 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Turkish and Greek foreign ministers agreed to work together to discuss and implement a series of confidence-building measures between the two countries , Turkish Daily News reported on Monday .
The agreement was reached by Turkish Foreign Minister Ismail Cem and his Greek counterpart George Papandreou on Sunday on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly in New York .
Following their talks , Cem said that Turkey was ready to discuss Aegean disputes with Greece under the guidelines of international law , adding that confidence-building measures would cover the Aegean issues .
Turkey insists that the boundaries of either countries ' territorial waters and air space in the Aegean Sea be solved by bilateral dialogue while Greece maintains that the only dispute in the Aegean is that of continental shelf rights and wants the International Court of Justice in the Hague to arbitrate .
The two North Atlantic Treaty Organization -LRB- NATO -RRB- members almost went to war in 1996 over claims to rocky islets in the Aegean called Imia in Greek and Kardak in Turkish .
Tension was defused only after mediation by the United States .
The Cyprus issue also remains as a major sticking point in promoting relations between Ankara and Athens .
The Mediterranean island has been divided since 1974 when Turkey occupied its northern third in response to an Athens -engineered coup .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Relations between the two Aegean rivals have improved significantly since last year , following a diplomatic rapprochement and a burst of cooperation in the wake of devastating earthquakes in both countries</ENAMEX> .
In a further sign of warming relations , Cem and Papandreou decided to submit a joint bid to host the 2008 European Soccer Championship , and agreed to organize a youth exchange program between the two countries .
They have also decided to meet in October respectively in Turkish northwestern city Marmaris and Greek Rhodes to discuss bilateral relations , particularly issues relating to tourism .
Analysts viewed these moves as new steps taken by the two countries to further the rapprochement of bilateral relations .
The two sides have proposed measures to improve relations , including reducing the number of military exercises of the two countries , opening direct lines of communication between their chiefs of general staff , and the coast guard and military aircraft flying unarmed over sensitive areas .
