ATHENS , January 16 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Turkish Foreign Minister Ismail Cem Sunday urged Greece to enter into an expanded dialogue with Turkey that will include Ankara 's Aegean territorial claims .
Turkey had been resolutely seeking a solution to the Aegean problems through peaceful means and calling for negotiations to this end , he said in an interview published Sunday in the Athens daily `` To Vima . ''
`` At this stage , Turkey and Greece should be ready to take up all bilateral issues in a frank and open-minded manner to reach a just and equitable solution in the Aegean , '' he said .
He stressed that the result of last month 's EU Helsinki summit provided a new impetus to attain that goal .
The Turkish minister also rejected U.N. resolutions and other international calls for the establishment of a bizonal , bicommunal federation on Cyprus .
Cem said that the Cypriot government had no right to negotiate EU accession for the entire island because there existed two sovereign , independent states in Cyprus .
Cem made the remarks in less than a week before Greek Foreign Minister George Papandreou travels to Ankara for the signing of a series of bilateral agreements and to discuss the future of the recent Greek - Turkish rapprochement .
Greece and Turkey , both NATO members , have closely gone to war three times in the past 25 years because of their disputes in the territorial waters , air space limits and the delimitation of the continental shelf in the Aegean Sea , and the Cyprus problem .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Last June , the two neighbors began several rounds of low-level talks as part of their efforts to improve their strained relations , and the outpouring of public sympathy and support during last year ` s unexpected earthquakes in the two countries have boosted also their relations .
While hoping to better its ties with Turkey , Greece has steadfastly refused to discuss with Turkey issues of sovereignty and territorial rights in the Aegean .</ENAMEX>
Athens , which maintains that the only problem with Turkey is the delimitation of the Aegean continental shelf , urges Turkey to refer its claims to the International Court of Justice at the Hague for arbitration .
