ANKARA , November 26 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Iraq 's Patriotic Union of Kurdistan -LRB- PUK -RRB- today accused another Iraqi group the Kurdistan Democratic Party -LRB- KDP -RRB- of cease-fire violations by bombing two PUK villages in northern Iraq .
Shazad Saib , PUK representative in Turkey , told Xinhua , `` The KDP forces bombed two villages in our region in northern Iraq Tuesday evening '' , showing that the KDP did not comply with the cease-fire declared by itself .
The KDP said in a statement Monday that it had decided to halt military activities as from 12 : 00 local time -LRB- 10 : 00 GMT -RRB- on November 24 .
But the cease-fire is conditional upon that the pro- Iranian PUK prevents Turkey 's outlawed Kurdish Workers ' Party -LRB- PKK -RRB- rebels and any other third party from carrying out military attacks against the KDP positions or against the civilians across the cease-fire lines in northern Iraq .
A KDP delegation led by its senior official Sami Abdurrahman who is in charge of the peace talks with the PUK was in Ankara Tuesday for discussion with Turkish officials .
The KDP , backed by Ankara and Baghdad , is calling for resumption of the Ankara peace process sponsored by the United States , Britain and Turkey .
However , the PUK official told Xinhua that the Ankara peace process is dead as Turkey has sent troops to northern Iraq and supported the KDP against the PUK. The Iraqi government has been deprived of exercising sovereignty in northern Iraq since the end of the 1991 Gulf War by the Western allied forces which had created a no-fly zone there .
The Iraqi government forces are not allowed to entered the area where Iraqi , Iranian and Turkish anti-government rebels have been operating as a base .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Turkey has kept its security forces in northern Iraq since May to destroy the bases of the PKK rebels who have been launching cross-border attacks against military targets in Turkey</ENAMEX> .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Turkey has repeatedly blamed the PUK for close ties with the PKK which has been fighting a 13-year -old separatist war for a Kurdish state in eastern and southeastern Turkey</ENAMEX> .
