WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Federal regulators gave final clearance Friday to a global joint venture between AT&T and British Telecommunications PLC , a deal that would combine the two companies ' international operations .
The combine would deal mostly with voice and data service , mainly for large commercial users .
The venture originally was valued at $ 10 billion .
The Federal Communications Commission found the application for the alliance to be in the public interest but imposed some limited conditions on the deal .
FCC approval is the final step in the regulatory process .
The companies expect to launch the global venture , called Concert , in about a month .
`` We are pleased the regulatory agencies both in Europe and the U.S. agree that our global joint venture will benefit customers as well as the competitive telecommunications marketplace , '' said David Dorman , the venture 's chief executive officer .
The FCC conditioned its approval on the companies compliance with an agreement reached among them , the Defense Department , the Justice Department and the Federal Bureau of Investigation .
The accord had to do with potential national security and law enforcement problems .
The agreement requires that domestic telecommunications facilities owned by the companies will be controlled by their subsidies and located within the United States .
This will ensure that U.S. law enforcement authorities have both the jurisdiction and the technical ability to conduct electronic surveillance .
The companies agreed to take reasonable measures to prevent improper use of domestic telecommunications facilities and to adopt and maintain policies to ensure electronic surveillance orders and other legal authorizations are kept confidential .
Also , the companies will require security clearances for people with access to sensitive network facilities and to keep access from unauthorized people .
Under the FCC 's other conditions , AT&T and their subsidiaries would be prohibited from getting exclusive operating agreements with British Telecom because of the joint venture .
The commission also required that BT comply with British regulations that the company must give its competitors access to local customers for long-distance and international calls at the same level of access that BT has .
The companies will use their combined international networks to become a `` carrier 's carrier '' for long-distance services offered by telephone companies operating in numerous markets .
The companies , in announcing the deal in July 1998 , said the venture would operate in three main areas : --A worldwide voice and data business offering telephone networks to multinational corporations and other big institutions .
--A global sales and service business that initially will target corporate clients in the financial , oil and information technology businesses .
--An international carrier services business that will develop low-cost communications links around the world for both individual and business customers .
Combined , AT&T and BT carry about half the calling traffic between the United States and Britain but own less than 20 percent of the network capacity .
