WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- The FBI 's espionage case against a Los Alamos weapons scientist was considered `` flawed from the outset '' because authorities identified a number of other suspects , but failed to investigate them , a congressional report revealed today .
The report also disclosed for the first time that in a polygraph test in February when the scientist , Wen Ho Lee , was asked if he had passed nuclear secrets `` to any unauthorized person , '' he failed the test .
The report by the leaders of the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee described a string of missteps , communications lapses and misunderstandings over three years that prevented the FBI from establishing a strong case against the Taiwan -born scientist .
Sen. Fred Thompson , R - Tenn. , the committee chairman , said the investigation was `` beset by communications failures and poor judgment '' and that Attorney General Janet Reno for the most part `` was out of the loop '' despite the issue 's importance .
`` The government 's investigation was not a comedy of errors , but a tragedy of errors , '' said Sen. Joe Lieberman of Connecticut , the committee 's ranking Democrat .
He too said Reno should have been more closely involved .
Asked this morning if she had seen the report , Reno said she had not had time to examine the details .
The findings summarized information gathered during two closed-door hearings the committee held on the federal investigation into Lee .
He was fired from his top-secret job last March after being the primary suspect since 1996 in the alleged theft by China of secrets involving the sophisticated W -88 nuclear warhead in the 1980s .
Lee has not been charged with a crime , although a federal grand jury was hearing evidence in the ongoing case .
In his only public comments , Lee in a television interview last Sunday categorically denied providing nuclear secrets to China or anyone else .
But the Senate report disclosed that last February , Lee was asked during an FBI polygraph test whether he had ever given specific classified computer code related to weapons testing , or `` passed W -88 information to any unauthorized person ? ''
`` Wen Ho Lee failed this polygraph test , '' said the report .
The 30-page report provided new details on the FBI 's failed attempts to get Justice Department approval to search Lee 's office computer .
Referring to the dispute between the FBI and Justice over the computer search , the bipartisan report said it was `` remarkable '' that FBI Director Louis Freeh `` at no point contacted the attorney general about this issue '' Reno was made aware of the FBI 's problems in getting approval for a computer search during a meeting in August 1997 , the report said .
She asked the deputy attorney general 's office to look into it , but never heard back from that office , the report said .
The FBI 's attempt to get clearance for a computer search , however , was made more difficult in part because of FBI bungling , the report suggested .
As early as 1996 , a series of misunderstandings between an FBI field agent and Los Alamos officials failed to make clear that apparently Lee had agreed on his computer being searched and that his computer , in fact , carried a `` banner '' warning such searches could be made .
The failure to provide accurate information to senior FBI and Justice officials had `` significant implications for the course of the Lee espionage investigation , '' the report said .
Last March , investigators finally searched Lee 's computer and found he had transferred thousands of top-secret computer code files from the Los Alamos highly secured computer system to his unclassified office computer that was linked to the Internet .
It has not been determined whether any of the data ever left the lab .
Lee , who appeared to pass another lie detecter test , was fired on March 8 .
At one point , the Justice Department 's office that reviewed requests for the Lee computer search described the case as `` flawed from the outset '' because the FBI had focused almost exclusively on Lee and his wife , also a Los Alamos employee , while other suspects were ignored .
`` The DOE and Bureau had -LRB- multiple -RRB- suspects , and only two were investigated , '' Justice attorney Allan Kornblum told the Senate committee , according to the report .
These other suspects also had access to the secret information at Los Alamos , traveled to China , had contacts with Chinese scientists visiting the New Mexico lab , and fit the profile that made Lee a prime suspect , the report said .
Still , they were not investigated in any detail , although the FBI questioned some of them earlier this year , the report said .
