WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- CIA director George Tenet insisted Tuesday he took `` decisive action '' when faced with an investigation 's finding that former director John Deutch violated security by working on secret material at home .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">His decision to strip his former boss of his security clearances proved that he acted properly , Tenet said .</ENAMEX>
He denied that the investigation was deliberately delayed , despite a CIA inquiry that suggested he and other top agency officials acted to slow down the process .
Details of the classified August 1999 report by the CIA 's inspector general were reported Tuesday by The New York Times .
In a statement , Tenet confirmed existence of the inspector general 's report but said he had acted appropriately .
`` The bottom line is that a complete investigation was done , decisive action was taken , and steps have been implemented to improve our security process , '' Tenet said .
Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott , R - Miss. , said reports such as the still-classified one by the CIA inspector general raise `` fundamental questions . ''
`` It seems to be a pattern .
I think it 's very troublesome , '' Lott told reporters .
But former Sen. Warren Rudman , R - N.H. , chairman of a presidentially-appointed commission which oversees intelligence issues , said he had followed the matter from 1998 when the CIA `` very properly '' notified his oversight panel about the inquiry into Deutch 's behavior .
`` Tenet did exactly what he should have done '' in stripping his predecessor of his security clearances , Rudman said .
`` Did he act quickly enough ?
That 's a subjective matter , '' he added .
CIA spokesman Bill Harlow said the CIA established a special panel to look into the handling of the case .
The panel still is at work , Harlow said .
Sen. Richard Shelby , R - Ala. , chairman of the Senate intelligence committee , said his committee would conduct an investigation once the special CIA panel 's work is complete .
The CIA announced last Aug. 20 that Tenet had severed Deutch 's access to classified information .
Deutch violated agency rules by keeping secret files on an unsecured computer at his home , the CIA said .
According to congressional and administration officials familiar with the report , Deutch deleted over a thousand files from his computer once he learned about the investigation in 1998 .
In the report , the inspector general said there was no evidence that any of the information had fallen into the hands of a foreign power , said the officials , who spoke on the condition of anonymity .
At the same time , it could not be proven that there had not been such a security breach , the officials said .
For the most part , Deutch used the classified material for a variety of writing projects , the officials said .
At the time , he was serving as a consultant to the CIA .
The matter comes against a backdrop of the government 's prosecution of Wen Ho Lee , a former Los Alamos National Laboratory scientist , on charges of mishandling and improperly copying top-secret nuclear weapons computer tapes .
Lee could face life in prison if convicted of breaching security by moving classified material to unsecured computers and computer tapes .
Lee , who was not charged with espionage , is being held without bail .
Harlow said Tenet and a handful of other CIA officials are able to work on classified material at home , but stringent safeguards are in place involving their computers , including lockable hard drives , safes for depositing laptops when not in use and prohibition against accessing the Internet .
At the White House , National Security Council spokesman David Leavy praised Tenet for taking `` strong , decisive and unprecedented action '' in the Deutch matter .
Leavy also said he sees no parallels to Lee 's case , and no double standard at work in the treatment of a top-ranking intelligence official .
`` He had his security clearance revoked .
That is quite punitive for a former director of the Central Intelligence Agency , '' Leavy said during the regular White House briefing for reporters .
Tenet goes before the Senate intelligence committee Wednesday for an annual report on world threats , and the issue of security could come up .
Deutch , a former deputy defense secretary who spent 38 years in public service , was CIA director from May 1995 to December 1996 .
When leaving his CIA post , agency technicians went to his home for routine checks to ensure that secrets were properly protected .
They found 31 classified documents on a CIA -issued computer not configured for work with secret documents .
In April 1999 , the Justice Department decided not to prosecute Deutch but recommended that the CIA review his continued suitability to hold high-level security clearances .
Justice concluded Deutch 's security lapses were reckless rather than criminal .
Deutch apologized .
The Times story did not accuse Tenet or his aides of violating laws in their handling of the matter .
`` The article in the newspaper this morning raised the rhetorical question , ` Can the CIA police itself ? '
The answer is that we can , and we did , '' Tenet said .
