WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- <ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">The State Department has suspended the security clearances of five employees for violations of security policies this year , spokesman Richard Boucher said Monday .
Another 27 employees had their security clearances suspended for other reasons in the last 18 months or two years , Boucher said .</ENAMEX>
The disclosure followed announcement over the weekend that Martin Indyk , the U.S. ambassador to Israel , was under FBI and State Department investigation for suspected security violations .
Indyk has lost his security clearance and no longer can participate in Mideast diplomacy .
`` He 's highly regarded for his contributions , '' Boucher said Monday .
`` Obviously , the fact that he does n't have a security clearance , and therefore is not able to participate in the deliberations , makes things more difficult , because he has been an important member of the team . ''
Boucher said there was no indication of espionage and `` there has been no indication that any intelligence information has been compromised .
This is a question of security procedures that have not been followed . ''
Boucher provided no details of the other cases .
He said he did not know which employees had been reinstated , but said he assumed some had been .
Last week , Sen. Rod Grams , R - Minn. , dropped a hold he had placed on seven career foreign service officers who had been nominated for ambassadorships .
They had accumulated about 100 security violations .
The violations reportedly included leaving safes open and removing classified documents from embassies .
Indyk was an important channel to Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak , who requested his return to Tel Aviv for a second tour .
In between , Indyk headed the State Department 's Near East bureau .
In both positions , and earlier as the head of the Middle East desk at the White House , he helped shape U.S. policy on the Arab - Israeli conflict .
In a speech this month in Jerusalem he said Israel and the Palestinians should share the Holy City .
The first American ambassador stripped of his security clearances , Indyk was sidelined as U.S. mediation to break a deadlock between Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat entered another critical stage .
Israeli and Palestinian negotiators were due to resume talks here on Wednesday .
The deadlock centers on the future of Jerusalem and other issues such as the disposition of hundreds of thousands of Palestinian refugees who claim Israel expelled them .
Indyk said in a statement this weekend : `` I regret that my trying to do the best possible job under very difficult conditions has led to the temporary suspension of my security clearances .
Jeopardizing the national security interests of the U.S. is absolutely abhorrent to me , and I would never do anything to compromise those interests . ''
He expressed gratitude that the State Department `` agreed with my firm conviction that no classified information has been compromised . ''
