WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- <ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Former CIA Director John M. Deutch , who previously admitted to mishandling sensitive data while heading the CIA , is now being investigated by the Defense Department for similar incidents , according to The Washington Post .</ENAMEX>
Defense Department documents allege that Deutch used unsecured computers at home and his America Online account to access classified defense information in the early to mid-1990s when he held high-ranking jobs at the Pentagon , the Post said in Saturday 's issue .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">`` We find his conduct in this regard particularly egregious in light of existing DOD policy directives addressing the safeguarding of classified information , '' the Post quoted an internal Defense Department memo as saying .</ENAMEX>
`` This situation was exacerbated because Dr. Deutch , while serving as the -LRB- deputy secretary of defense -RRB- , declined departmental requests that he allow security systems to be installed in his residence .
`` The evidence we obtained clearly establishes that Dr. Deutch failed to follow even the most basic security precautions . ''
Sen. Charles E. Grassley , R - Iowa , confirmed that the probe had been widened and asked the Justice Department to look into it , the newspaper said .
`` This is now a pattern , '' Grassley was quoted as saying .
`` Evidently , Mr. Deutch is a congenital downloader of classified information . ''
A spokeswoman for Grassley did not return a message seeking comment late Friday night .
When allegations first arose concerning Deutch 's use of computers while at the CIA , the Pentagon said it would try to determine whether similar problems had occurred while Deutch was at the CIA .
A Pentagon spokesman , Navy Capt. Tim Taylor , said that as recently as Thursday , officials had said no results of that investigation were available .
He had no other comment on the Post report .
CIA spokesman Mark Mansfield declined to comment .
Deutch served as defense undersecretary for acquisitions and technology from April 1993 to March 1994 , when he became deputy defense secretary .
He was appointed CIA director in 1995 , and left the CIA in December of the following year .
Two days after Deutch retired from the CIA , agency personnel discovered classified information stored on government computers at Deutch 's home .
Deutch eventually admitted the security breach , apologized and was stripped of his security clearances .
There is no evidence that computer hackers or spies obtained classified information as a result of Deutch 's actions , though the Post quoted officials familiar with the case as saying that a Justice Department official and retired prosecutor , Paul E. Coffey , has recommended that charges be brought against Deutch .
