WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- An internal report suggesting that current CIA officials delayed disciplining former director John Deutch for violating security rules is raising questions on Capitol Hill .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">CIA Director George Tenet insisted he took `` decisive action '' when confronted with the finding that Deutch violated security by working on secret material at home , even stripping Deutch of his security clearances .</ENAMEX>
Tenet was to appear today before the Senate Intelligence Committee for a previously scheduled hearing on world threats .
Members of the panel suggested they would grill Tenet on the new allegations .
`` This is an extremely serious matter , '' said Sen. Richard Bryan , D - Nev. , the incoming vice chairman of the panel .
He said he planned to question Tenet closely about the CIA inspector general 's report .
Committee Chairman Richard Shelby , R - Ala. , cited `` grave concerns with the findings and conclusions '' of the report .
Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott , R - Miss. , said reports such as the still-classified findings of the CIA inspector general raise `` fundamental questions . ''
`` It seems to be a pattern .
I think it 's very troublesome , '' Lott told reporters .
In addition to the previously disclosed revelations about Deutch 's computer use , the inspector general 's report , first reported Tuesday by The New York Times , suggested that Tenet and other CIA officials dragged their feet in taking action against Deutch .
Tenet disputes that .
`` The bottom line is that a complete investigation was done , decisive action was taken , and steps have been implemented to improve our security process , '' Tenet said in a statement issued Tuesday by the CIA .
CIA spokesman Bill Harlow said the CIA established a special panel to look into the handling of the case .
The panel still is at work , Harlow said .
Deutch , a former deputy defense secretary who spent 38 years in public service , was CIA director from May 1995 to December 1996 .
When he left his CIA post , agency technicians went to Deutch 's home for a routine inspection to ensure that secrets were protected properly .
They found 31 classified documents on a CIA -issued computer not configured for work with secret documents .
The CIA announced last Aug. 20 that Tenet had severed Deutch 's access to classified information .
According to congressional and administration officials familiar with the report , Deutch deleted over a thousand files from his computer once he learned about the investigation in 1998 .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">In the report , the inspector general said there is no evidence to show whether any of the information fell into the hands of a foreign power , said the officials , who spoke on condition of anonymity .</ENAMEX>
For the most part , Deutch used the classified material for a variety of writing projects , the officials said .
At the time , he was serving as a consultant to the CIA .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">The matter comes against a backdrop of the government 's prosecution of Wen Ho Lee , a former Los Alamos National Laboratory scientist , on charges of mishandling and improperly copying top-secret nuclear weapons computer tapes .</ENAMEX>
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Lee could face life in prison if convicted of breaching security by moving classified material to unsecured computers and computer tapes .
Lee was not charged with espionage but is being held without bail .</ENAMEX>
Harlow said Tenet and a handful of other CIA officials are authorized to work on classified material at home , but stringent safeguards are in place involving their computers , including lockable hard drives , safes for depositing laptops when not in use and prohibition against accessing the Internet .
At the White House , National Security Council spokesman David Leavy praised Tenet for taking `` strong , decisive and unprecedented action '' in the Deutch matter .
Leavy also said he sees no parallels to Lee 's case , and no double standard at work in the treatment of a top-ranking intelligence official .
