WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- CIA Director George Tenet says there is no evidence that classified material improperly kept on former director John Deutch 's home computer fell into the wrong hands via the Internet .
Still , `` We cannot exclude that possibility , '' he told a Senate committee looking into the security lapse Wednesday .
`` He was sloppy in what he did , '' Tenet said of his former boss and predecessor .
`` He worked around the clock . ''
Testifying before the Senate Intelligence Committee , Tenet denied he deliberately delayed an investigation into Deutch 's computer practices .
But , he conceded , `` The internal investigation took too long .
The process was not perfect . ''
Tenet stripped Deutch of his security clearances in August , even though the CIA investigation into his alleged mishandling of classified materials began in December 1996 , the month Tenet became acting director .
An internal report by the CIA 's inspector general faults Tenet and other senior CIA officials for waiting too long before notifying the Justice Department or congressional intelligence oversight committees of the case .
Tenet agreed the CIA was slow in notifying appropriate officials and lawmakers .
`` There was no excuse for that , '' he said at the hearing .
Deutch was CIA director from May 1995 to December 1996 .
When he left his CIA post , agency technicians went to his home and found 31 classified documents on a CIA -issued computer not configured for work with secret documents .
Tenet said most of the classified documents on Deutch 's computers were not ones he took home from secure CIA computers but ones he created in writing reports .
Even so , Tenet said , there were `` high levels of classified materials '' on Deutch 's home computer .
According to those familiar with the still-classified inspector general 's report , Deutch deleted more than 1,000 secret documents on the computer when he became aware of the inquiry .
Deutch has apologized .
Although the CIA eventually referred the case to the Justice Department , Deutch has not been prosecuted .
Tenet was grilled on the security lapses during a hearing on world trouble spots .
In that testimony , Tenet said : --There is a `` high potential '' for a military flare-up across the Taiwan Strait this year because of increasing tensions between China and Taiwan .
--Over the next 15 years , U.S. cities could be within range of ballistic missiles from `` North Korea , probably Iran and possibly Iraq . ''
--The CIA , working with foreign governments , has helped to bring `` more than two dozens terrorists to justice '' since July 1998 .
More than half were associated with suspected fugitive terrorist Osama bin Laden .
--Russia 's economic difficulties are weakening the government 's ability to safeguard its nuclear arsenal .
` While there is no evidence weapons are missing , `` We remain concerned by reports of lax discipline , labor strikes , poor morale and criminal activities at nuclear storage facilities . ''
The Deutch matter was one of `` grave concern , '' said the committee chairman , Sen. Richard Shelby .
`` The American people have a keen interest in the performance of senior officials charged with upholding our laws and policies with respect to the protection of classified information , '' said Shelby , R - Ala .
Shelby asked Tenet if he could assure Congress that foreign powers or other unauthorized parties had not gotten access to Deutch 's materials via the Internet .
While there was no evidence of that , Tenet said : '' `` We cannot exclude that possibility .
I ca n't give you a statement that it absolutely did n't happen . ''
Deutch clearly violated CIA security rules on the handling of classified documents , Tenet said .
But Tenet balked at questions on whether the Deutch material posed as much damage to U.S. security if it were to fall into the wrong hands as information passed on by convicted spies Aldrich Ames and Jonathan Pollard .
This is not a case of espionage , Tenet said .
`` I would not put the Deutch case in the same category as Ames and Pollard .
I do n't think it 's fair . ''
