WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- The U.S. ambassador to Israel is under FBI investigation for suspected security violations , closing a critical channel to Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak in the midst of difficult peace negotiations .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">Apparently the first American ambassador stripped of his security clearances , Martin Indyk is denied access to classified documents and even discussions with Barak or other Middle East figures , a senior State Department official said Saturday .</ENAMEX>
By their nature , such conversations are considered classified .
President Clinton endorses the State Department 's handling of the case and does not think the Indyk situation will affect the U.S. peace efforts , said White House spokesman Joe Lockhart , traveling with Clinton in California .
While the investigation continues , Indyk , like all visitors , must be escorted personally by a department official to go beyond the State Department lobby , cafeteria and a few other nonsensitive areas .
The two-time ambassador to Tel Aviv and recent head of the State Department 's Near East Bureau `` can still talk to people , but he can only have coffeehouse conversations , '' said the official , speaking on condition of anonymity .
A law enforcement official , also speaking anonymously , said Indyk is alleged to have mishandled work-related classified materials , including taking some home .
Indyk 's indiscretion involved the use of an unclassified , government-owned laptop computer to prepare while in transit memorandums about discussions with foreign leaders , said a source outside the State Department who is familiar with the investigation .
Once entered into the State Department system , the documents were classified .
The source , speaking on condition of anonymity , said Indyk also was accused of removing classified briefing books to his office to prepare for meetings .
`` I regret that my trying to do the best possible job under very difficult conditions has led to the temporary suspension of my security clearances , '' Indyk said in a statement .
`` Jeopardizing the national security interests of the U.S. is absolutely abhorrent to me , and I would never do anything to compromise those interests . ''
He expressed gratitude that the State Department `` agreed with my firm conviction that no classified information has been compromised . ''
State Department officials have been ultrasensitive about security since the April disclosure that a laptop containing top-secret information about arms proliferation had vanished .
Meanwhile , Indyk 's former deputy in the bureau , Ronald Neuman , nominated to be ambassador to Bahrain , was suspended from his job without pay in connection with an inquiry into his handling of classified materials .
The Neuman matter was said to have been resolved , but he apparently has not been reinstated .
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright `` holds Ambassador Indyk in very high regard and values his contribution greatly , '' State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said .
But , he said , `` She has been absolutely clear on the need for everyone to follow security procedures . ''
`` There is no indication of espionage in this matter at this time , '' Boucher said .
`` There is no indication that any classified information was compromised '' by Indyk .
Indyk was sent to Tel Aviv for an unusual second term as ambassador last year at the request of Barak .
With Barak 's election to succeed hard-liner Benjamin Netanyahu , the Clinton administration saw larger opportunities for a peace settlement between Israel and the Palestinians .
Gadi Baltiansky , a Barak spokesman , said in a statement Saturday that Barak `` highly appreciates Ambassador Indyk and his contribution to furthering the peace process . ''
Indyk returned to Washington this month to help prepare for Clinton 's separate talks with Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat on the sidelines of the Millennium Summit at the United Nations in New York .
After the Barak and Arafat sessions with Clinton , which produced no movement either on the future of Jerusalem or on other aspects of the stalemate , Indyk suggested in a speech that Israel and the Palestinians eventually must share the Holy City .
Israel considers undivided Jerusalem its permanent capital , and the Palestinians demand sovereignty over its eastern part .
Indyk , 49 , held jobs with a pro- Israel lobby and a Middle East think tank before taking a White House job with the newly elected Clinton in 1993 .
Born in London and reared in Australia , Indyk became a U.S. citizen just before being sworn in as head of the Middle East desk at the National Security Council .
Clinton then sent him as ambassador to Israel in April 1995 for 2&frac12 ; years .
In that time , he drew close to the late Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin , who led Israel into negotiations with Arafat and the Palestinians .
Rabin was a mentor of Barak , who like Rabin is a former Israeli armed forces chief .
Indyk will remain in Washington , where , Boucher said , `` He has cooperated fully with Department of State and FBI investigators . ''
As head of State Department 's Near East Bureau , Indyk was a leading formulator of tough Clinton administration positions at the time against both Iran and Iraq .
He also was paired with Dennis Ross , senior U.S. mediator on the Arab - Israeli conflict under four secretaries of state , to work on the half-century -old dispute .
Indyk 's suspension comes in the same week it was revealed that the Defense Department and the Justice Department were investigating former CIA Director John Deutch for alleged security violations he committed while deputy secretary of defense .
Those alleged breaches also included sloppy handling of secret data on personal computers and laptops .
Deutch admitted to security violations as CIA director after he retired ; he apologized and was stripped of his security clearances .
The acknowledged security violations while he was at the CIA are the primary focus of the Justice Department 's renewed criminal investigation of Deutch .
-- EDITOR 'S NOTE -- Associated Press writer Michael J. Sniffen in Washington contributed to this story .
