WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- The State Department does n't take strong enough action against diplomats who violate security regulations , a senator charged following news that five department employees temporarily lost security clearances for such breaches .
`` They did n't say they fired anyone , did they ? '' said Sen. Rod Grams , R - Minn. , a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee .
`` They do n't take security violations very seriously . ''
He said Secretary of State Madeleine Albright almost certainly would be asked about the issue when she appeared before a hearing of the committee Tuesday to assess foreign policy during the Clinton administration .
Grams commented to The Associated Press after department spokesman Richard Boucher said Monday that as of Jan. 1 , officials have suspended the security clearances of five employees for violations of security policies .
Another 27 employees had their security clearances suspended for other reasons in the past 18 months to two years , Boucher said .
The disclosure followed announcement over the weekend that Martin Indyk , the U.S. ambassador to Israel , was under FBI and State Department investigation for suspected security violations .
Indyk has lost his security clearance and no longer can participate in Mideast diplomacy .
`` He 's highly regarded for his contributions , '' Boucher said Monday .
`` Obviously , the fact that he does n't have a security clearance , and therefore is not able to participate in the deliberations , makes things more difficult , because he has been an important member of the team . ''
Boucher said there was no indication of espionage and `` there has been no indication that any intelligence information has been compromised .
This is a question of security procedures that have not been followed . ''
He provided no details of the other cases .
He said he did not know which employees had been reinstated , but said he assumed some had been .
Last week , Grams dropped a hold he had placed on the appointment of seven career foreign service officers who had been nominated for ambassadorships .
They had accumulated about 100 security violations .
The violations reportedly included leaving safes open and removing classified documents from embassies .
The first American ambassador stripped of his security clearances , Indyk was sidelined as U.S. mediation to break a deadlock between Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat entered another critical stage .
Israeli and Palestinian negotiators were due to resume talks here on Wednesday .
Indyk said in a statement this weekend : `` I regret that my trying to do the best possible job under very difficult conditions has led to the temporary suspension of my security clearances .
Jeopardizing the national security interests of the U.S. is absolutely abhorrent to me , and I would never do anything to compromise those interests . ''
