WASHINGTON --
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">The Department of Defense failed to complete security clearance checks on 92 percent of its employees and contractors who have access to classified information , according to a congressional report released Wednesday .
The General Accounting Office said lapses in the screening of Defense personnel risk national security and make the department vulnerable to espionage .
Rep. Ike Skelton , a Lexington , Mo. , Democrat and chairman of the House Armed Services Committee , requested the review last year after a Pentagon lawyer was convicted of espionage for trying to sell classified material to foreign governments .</ENAMEX>
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">The department is supposed to probe nine areas of a person 's background before giving him or her a security clearance , but it failed to check at least one area in 92 percent of the cases and overlooked two areas 77 percent of the time , a GAO sampling of 530 civilian and uniformed personnel found .</ENAMEX>
In addition , about 600,000 employees holding clearances are overdue for periodic re-investigations of their backgrounds , the report said .
Overall , clearances take an average of 204 days , more than double the department 's goal .
`` I was caught by surprise , '' Skelton said of the GAO review .
`` Several astounding findings are included in the report . ... ''
A defense official said the department is moving promptly to make sure background checks are more thorough and accurate .
`` This is about the security of the United States of America , '' said Lt. Gen. Charles Cunningham , acting director of the department 's Defense Security Service , which is charged with doing the checks .
`` It 's incredibly important . ''
Cunningham said the department will spend $ 30 million to $ 40 million to upgrade training programs for people who do security checks .
Up to $ 100 million more will be spent to hire private contractors to help the department catch up , he said .
`` The report makes it clear we were indeed suffering a bottleneck in our system , '' Cunningham said .
GAO auditors cited numerous reasons for the lapses , including poor training , relaxation of some standards , confusion about the standards and failure to effectively use automated means for doing background checks .
Skelton partly blamed the problem on cutbacks and downsizing at the Defense Security Service , a branch of the Pentagon .
Auditors said the service has operated for four years with little or no oversight by the appropriate assistant secretary of defense .
<ENAMEX TYPE="VITAL">Skelton said nothing is more important than sound security clearances , especially because 68 Department of Defense employees have been charged with espionage since 1982 .
The GAO did not explore whether those persons had insufficient background checks .</ENAMEX>
`` Although there is no guarantee that individuals fully investigated will not engage in espionage , these investigations are a critical first step in ensuring that those granted access to classified information can be trusted to safeguard it , '' wrote Carol R. Schuster , associate GAO director for national security preparedness .
Espionage convictions in the department are small compared with the number of employees , but hundreds of other cases have ended in settlements , suicides or defections , Schuster said .
Defense employees who have access to secret information are subject to being checked on residency , nationality , education , prior seven years of employment , character references , credit background and criminal history .
In addition , the subject and his neighbors are to be interviewed .
Auditors found that the areas most likely to overlooked were a person 's residence , birth and citizenship if foreign-born , employment history and character references .
The personal interview and financial status were overlooked least often .
There are about 2.4 million active duty civilian , military and contract employees in the Department of Defense who have security clearances , including 524,000 who have top secret security clearance -- the highest level .
The 530 persons checked randomly by the auditors early this year have top secret clearance .
Of the total checked , 226 were persons given initial clearance and 304 were persons due for re-investigation of their backgrounds .
That is to be done every five to 15 years .
