WASHINGTON --
Federal authorities have intensified their deliberations about whether to prosecute a Los Alamos nuclear weapons scientist on charges of mishandling highly classified atomic data , government officials said on Tuesday .
A decision on whether to charge the scientist , Wen Ho Lee , is expected within days , the officials said , after a crucial meeting held Saturday at the White House attended by the administration 's top security , law enforcement and energy officials .
The participants concluded after a lengthy intelligence review that should Attorney General Janet Reno decide to prosecute , the secrets that would likely be divulged at a criminal trial would not irreparably damage the country 's national security .
Among those present in addition to Reno were Sandy Berger , President Clinton 's national security adviser ; Energy Secretary Bill Richardson ; FBI Director Louis Freeh ; CIA Director George Tenet , and John Kelly , the top federal prosecutor in Albuquerque , N.M. , who has jurisdiction over the case .
Law enforcement officials and Kelly have recommended going ahead with a case against Lee , said the officials , who asked not to be identified .
Richardson , who supports bringing a prosecution , indicated that he is prepared to exercise his statutory authority to declassify atomic secrets likely to be needed as evidence in the trial , the officials said .
But they added that it is Reno who must decide whether to seek an indictment and she has not given prosecutors final approval .
Lee , his lawyers and his supporters have repeatedly said that he has done nothing wrong and that no one has ever been criminally charged for similar conduct , for example , transferring classified information into a nonclassified computer .
Mark Holscher , Lee 's attorney in Los Angeles , did not return telephone calls on Tuesday .
In the past , Holscher and Lee 's other supporters have said that Lee is a loyal American who has been unfairly singled out for investigation because of his Chinese ancestry .
They say that Lee is being made a scapegoat by law enforcement and energy officials who have been under fire by Republicans in Congress for security lapses at the country 's weapons laboratories .
In a television interview in August , Lee also said he was innocent .
The highly unusual White House meeting reflects the acute political sensitivities and high stakes involved in a case that has become a battleground between the administration and Republican critics who have said that Chinese intelligence had used scientists to steal information from the weapons labs that was used to vastly accelerate the pace of Beijing 's nuclear weapons program .
As expected , if he is charged , Lee will not be accused of espionage , the officials said , which would require prosecutors to show that information was not only stolen but passed to a foreign power .
Prosecutors are now weighing whether to charge Lee with a lesser crime of mishandling and failing to adequately safeguard classified information .
The recent surge of activity in the case comes just before the expiration of the term of a federal grand jury in Albuquerque that has been hearing evidence in the case .
The grand jurors were to be dismissed this month , but their terms have been extended until early January .
Lee , who worked in the nuclear weapons design area of Los Alamos , was fired from his job in March for security violations .
By that time , he had been under investigation for nearly three years in connection with the government 's inquiry into the apparent theft of U.S. nuclear secrets by China .
U.S. investigators believe that design information related to the most advanced nuclear warhead in the nation 's arsenal , the W -88 , was obtained by China , in part through espionage .
The W -88 warhead was designed at Los Alamos .
After Lee was fired , investigators found evidence that he had transferred vast amounts of secret nuclear data from the classified system at Los Alamos into an unclassified system .
In a televised interview , Lee acknowledged that he transferred the data , but said he did so to protect the material from being lost in computer crashes .
Since the investigation into Lee became public , a furious debate has erupted over whether the inquiry was properly handled by the Energy Department and the FBI .
Subsequently , FBI officials said that the initial inquiry into the evidence of Chinese atomic espionage was flawed , and other current and former government officials argued that investigators had focused prematurely on Lee without first determining how widely accessible the information on the W -88 warhead had been at the time officials concluded the Chinese obtained it .
Asian - American groups rallied to Lee 's cause , saying he was the victim of racial stereotyping .
In September , Reno and Freeh ordered federal agents to broaden their investigation into the evidence of China 's theft of W -88 secrets , moving beyond Los Alamos to look at other labs and defense contractors that may have had access to the data .
But even as that broader inquiry into evidence of Chinese espionage is continuing , the government has been moving forward in its investigation of Lee over allegations of unauthorized computer transfers of nuclear secrets .
In addition to the unauthorized transfers of nuclear data into an unclassified computer system at Los Alamos , government investigators now believe that Lee also copied the nuclear secrets onto computer tapes and took those tapes out of the lab , officials said .
The FBI cannot account for those missing computer tapes , officials said .
Officials have no evidence that the tapes have been handed over to any other unauthorized individuals , however .
The recent discovery of the missing computer tapes appears to have convinced government officials that the evidence against Lee may be more serious than initially believed .
Stephen Younger , associate laboratory director for nuclear weapons , who oversees the division where Lee worked , has completed a highly classified analysis of Lee 's computer activities that shows that the potential damage to national security could be extensive , officials said .
If he is charged in the computer downloading case , Lee 's attorneys appear likely to respond by saying that he is the victim of selective prosecution for relatively common practices .
Former CIA Director John Deutch , for example , who was investigated by the CIA 's inspector general for improperly handling classified information on his computer , had his security clearance stripped this year , but was not charged with any crime .
But Los Alamos officials have said that they disagree with Lee 's assertions that his computer activities were routine .
John Browne , the director of Los Alamos , said in an interview in August that `` We have no evidence that anyone has ever done anything like this before at Los Alamos , and we have looked .
I have no doubt that he violated Los Alamos security regulations , and I have no doubt that he deserved to be terminated .
We have fired people for much less . ''
