WASHINGTON --
The Central Intelligence Agency announced on Friday that it had suspended the security clearance of its former director , John Deutch , after concluding that as director he had improperly handled national secrets on a desktop computer at his home .
Deutch 's actions , which occurred during the 18 months he served as director of central intelligence before resigning in December 1996 , left highly classified information on an unsecured computer , vulnerable to spies or computer hackers , the agency concluded .
In a statement announcing the suspension , the agency said the current director , George Tenet , imposed the suspension `` for an indefinite period of time '' after the agency 's inspector general concluded that Deutch had created a risk to the nation 's security .
While the inspector general 's report `` found no evidence that national security information was lost , the potential for damage to U.S. security existed as a result of the actions described in the report , '' the statement said .
After stepping down , Deutch continued to serve in advisory roles that required access to classified information , including as a consultant to Tenet and as chairman of the Commission on Non - Proliferation , a group mandated by Congress that recently completed a study of the spread of weapons .
The charges against Deutch arose days after he stepped down as director , when CIA technicians reviewing equipment in his house in Maryland discovered highly classified information on a desktop computer .
Although the computer belonged to the agency , it was not equipped to contain classified information .
In April , Newsweek magazine reported that the technicians had discovered 31 secret files , including documents related to Iraq and a 1996 terrorist bombing in Saudi Arabia that killed 19 American troops .
Officials at the agency declined to discuss the files in greater detail , so the extent of lapses by Deutch and the nature of the data involved remains unknown .
The suspension is the first time in the agency 's 52 years that a former director has been stripped of access to highly classified information .
In his own statement released by the agency , Deutch expressed regret for his mishandling of the information and acknowledged that he had failed to follow the strict rules for safeguarding secrets .
He said he respected Tenet 's decision to suspend his clearance .
`` I want to make it clear that I never considered the information to be at risk or intended to violate security procedures , '' Deutch said .
`` But good intentions are simply not good enough .
Strict compliance is the standard . ''
Deutch 's case has parallels to the one against Wen Ho Lee , a physicist at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico who was dismissed in March after being accused of transferring classified computer files to a personal computer .
Lee , who has denied the accusations , remains the subject of an investigation into whether he passed information about the nation 's nuclear arsenal to China .
Administration officials said the decision to discipline Deutch had nothing to do with the furor over Lee and China 's espionage .
But an associate of Deutch suggested the furor over security lapses at Los Alamos had created a climate that made it difficult for the agency not to punish Deutch harshly .
`` I do n't know how Los Alamos factored in , '' said the associate , who would speak on the condition of not being named , `` but it is a difficult period . ''
Shortly after the accusations about China 's espionage surfaced , Energy Secretary Bill Richardson appointed Deutch to review security at the weapons laboratories , but Deutch withdrew a short time later .
The suspension of Deutch 's security clearance precludes him from serving in those kinds of positions .
The director of central intelligence has the power to review and lift a suspension , but that seems unlikely in Deutch 's case , given the agency 's findings against him .
The Justice Department investigated Deutch 's actions but after a yearlong inquiry declined to charge him with criminal wrongdoing .
However , the department referred its findings to the CIA for disciplinary proceedings after concluding that his actions were reckless .
Deutch said in his statement that he had erred by using his personal computer `` to compose classified documents and memoranda . ''
`` While it was absolutely necessary for me to work at home and while on travel , '' he said , `` in hindsight it is clear that I should have insisted that I be provided the means of accomplishing this work in a manner fully consistent with all the security rules .
No one , including the director , is exempt from compliance with these rules . ''
Deutch , now a professor of chemistry at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , served for nearly four decades in various national security positions , including as undersecretary of energy and deputy secretary of defense .
