WASHINGTON --
Working with nuclear secrets stolen from a U.S. government laboratory , China has made a leap in the development of nuclear weapons : the miniaturization of its bombs , according to administration officials .
Until recently , China 's nuclear weapons designs were a generation behind those of the United States , largely because Beijing was unable to produce small warheads that could be launched from a single missile at multiple targets and form the backbone of a modern nuclear force .
But by the mid-1990s , China had built and tested such small bombs , a breakthrough that officials say was accelerated by the theft of U.S. nuclear secrets from Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico .
The espionage is believed to have occurred in the mid-1980s , officials said .
But it was not detected until 1995 , when American experts analyzing Chinese nuclear test results found similarities to America 's most advanced miniature warhead , the W -88 .
By the next year , government investigators had identified a suspect , an American scientist at Los Alamos laboratory , where the atomic bomb was first developed .
The investigators also concluded that Beijing was continuing to steal secrets from the government 's major nuclear weapons laboratories , which had been increasingly opened to foreign visitors since the end of the Cold War .
The White House was told of the full extent of China 's spying in the summer of 1997 , on the eve of the first U.S. - Chinese summit meeting in eight years -- a meeting intended to dramatize the success of President Clinton 's efforts to improve relations with Beijing .
White House officials say they took the allegations seriously ; as proof of this they cite Clinton 's ordering the labs within six months to improve security .
But some U.S. officials assert that the White House sought to minimize the espionage issue for policy reasons .
`` This conflicted with their China policy , '' said a U.S. official , who like many others in this article spoke on condition of anonymity .
`` It undercut the administration 's efforts to have a strategic partnership with the Chinese . ''
The White House denies the assertions .
`` The idea that we tried to cover up or downplay these allegations to limit the damage to United States - Chinese relations is absolutely wrong , '' said Gary Samore , the senior National Security Council official who handled the issue .
Yet a reconstruction by The New York Times reveals that throughout the government , the response to the nuclear theft was marked by delays , inaction and skepticism -- even though senior intelligence officials regarded it as one of the most damaging spy cases in recent history .
Initially , the FBI did not aggressively pursue the criminal investigation of lab theft , U.S. officials said .
Now , nearly three years later , no arrests have been made .
Only in the last several weeks , after prodding from Congress and the secretary of energy , have government officials administered lie detector tests to the main suspect , a Los Alamos computer scientist who is Chinese - American .
The suspect failed a test in February , according to senior administration officials .
At the Energy Department , officials waited more than a year to act on the FBI 's 1997 recommendations to improve security at the weapons laboratories and restrict the suspect 's access to classified information , officials said .
The department 's chief of intelligence , who raised the first alarm about the case , was ordered last year by senior officials not to tell Congress about his findings because critics might use them to attack the administration 's China policies , officials said .
And at the White House , senior aides to Clinton fostered a skeptical view of the evidence of Chinese espionage and its significance .
White House officials , for example , said they determined on learning of it that the Chinese spying would have no bearing on the administration 's dealings with China , which included the increased exports of satellites and other militarily useful items .
They continued to advocate looser controls over sales of supercomputers and other equipment , even as intelligence analysts documented the scope of China 's espionage .
But after learning that Samore had insisted that this case had no implications for China policy , the president 's national security adviser , Sandy Berger , acknowledged Friday night that the case was clearly relevant .
`` We already knew that China was a country that ought not to get sensitive technology , '' Berger said .
`` This reinforced that . ''
Samore , the Security Council official , did not accept the Energy Department 's conclusion that China 's nuclear advances stemmed largely from the theft of U.S. secrets .
In 1997 , as Clinton prepared to meet with President Jiang Zemin of China , he asked the CIA for a quick alternative analysis of the issue .
The agency found that China had stolen secrets from Los Alamos but differed with the Energy Department over the significance of the spying .
In personal terms , the handling of this case is very much the story of the Energy Department intelligence official who first raised questions about the Los Alamos case , Notra Trulock .
Trulock became a secret star witness before a select congressional committee last fall .
In a unanimous report that remains secret , the bipartisan panel embraced his conclusions about Chinese espionage , officials said .
Taking issue with the White House 's view , the panel saw clear implications in the espionage case for U.S. - China policy , and has now made dozens of policy-related recommendations , officials said .
A debate still rages within the government over whether Trulock was right about the significance of the Los Alamos nuclear theft .
But even senior administration officials who do not think so credit Trulock with forcing them to confront the realities of Chinese atomic espionage .
China 's technical advance allows it to make mobile missiles , ballistic missiles with multiple warheads and small warheads for submarines -- the main elements of a modern nuclear force .
While White House officials question whether China will actually deploy a more advanced nuclear force soon , they acknowledge that Beijing has made plans to do so .
In early 1996 Trulock traveled to CIA headquarters to tell officials there of the evidence his team had gathered on the apparent Chinese theft of U.S. nuclear designs .
As Trulock gathered his charts and drawings and wrapped up his top-secret briefing , the agency 's chief spy hunter , Paul Redmond , sat stunned .
At the dawn of the Atomic Age , a Soviet spy ring that included Julius Rosenberg had stolen the first nuclear secrets out of Los Alamos .
Now , at the end of the Cold War , the Chinese seemed to have succeeded in penetrating the same weapons lab .
`` This is going to be just as bad as the Rosenbergs , '' Redmond recalled saying .
The evidence that so alarmed him had surfaced a year earlier .
Senior nuclear weapons experts at Los Alamos , poring over data from the most recent Chinese underground nuclear tests , had detected eerie similarities between the latest Chinese and U.S. bomb designs .
From what they could tell , Beijing was testing a smaller and more lethal nuclear device configured remarkably like the W -88 , the most modern , miniaturized warhead in the U.S. arsenal .
In April 1995 , they brought their findings to Trulock .
Officials declined to detail the evidence uncovered by the Los Alamos scientists , who have access to a wide range of classified intelligence data and seismic and other measurements .
But just as the scientists were piecing it together , they were handed an intelligence windfall from Beijing .
In June 1995 , they were told , a Chinese official gave CIA analysts what appeared to be a 1988 Chinese government document describing the country 's nuclear weapons program .
The document , a senior official said , specifically mentioned the W -88 and described some of the warhead 's key design features .
The Los Alamos laboratory , where the W -88 had been designed , quickly emerged as the most likely source of the leak .
One of three national weapons labs owned by the Department of Energy , Los Alamos , 35 miles outside Sante Fe , N.M. , was established in 1943 during the Manhattan Project .
Trulock and his team knew just how vulnerable Los Alamos was to modern espionage .
The three labs had long resisted FBI and congressional pressure to tighten their security policies .
Energy officials acknowledge that there have long been security problems at the labs .
Los Alamos and Sandia National Laboratories , also in New Mexico , had in 1994 been granted waivers from an Energy Department policy that visiting foreign scientists be subjected to background checks .
Lab officials resented the intrusions caused by counterintelligence measures , arguing that restrictions on foreign visitors would clash with the labs ' new mandate to help Russia and other nations safeguard their nuclear stockpiles .
The Clinton administration was also using increased access to the laboratories to support its policy of engagement with China , as had been done under previous , Republican administrations .
In December 1996 , for example , China 's defense minister , Gen. Chi Haotian , visited Sandia on a Pentagon -sponsored trip .
Energy Department officials were not told in advance , and they later complained that Chi and his delegation had not received proper clearances , officials said .
Still , there is no evidence in this case that foreign visitors were involved in the theft of information .
In late 1995 and early 1996 , Trulock and his team took their findings to the FBI .
A team of FBI and Energy Department officials traveled to the three weapons labs and pored over travel and work records of lab scientists who had access to the relevant technology .
By February the team had narrowed its focus to five possible suspects , including a computer scientist working in the nuclear weapons area at Los Alamos , officials said .
This suspect `` stuck out like a sore thumb , '' said one official .
In 1985 , for example , the suspect 's wife was invited to address a Chinese conference on sophisticated computer topics even though she was only a secretary at Los Alamos .
Her husband , the real expert , accompanied her , a U.S. official said .
By April 1996 , the Energy Department decided to brief the White House .
A group of senior officials including Trulock sat down with Berger , then Clinton 's deputy national security adviser , to tell him that China appeared to have acquired the W -88 and that a spy for China might still be at Los Alamos .
`` I was first made aware of this in 1996 , '' Berger said in an interview .
By June the FBI formally opened a criminal investigation into the theft of the W -88 design .
But the inquiry made little progress over the rest of the year .
When Energy Department officials asked about the inquiry at the end of 1996 , they came away convinced that the bureau had assigned few resources to the case .
A senior bureau official acknowledged that his agency was aware of the Energy Department 's criticism but pointed out that it was difficult to investigate the case without alerting the suspects .
The bureau maintained tight control over the case .
The CIA counterintelligence office , for one , was not kept informed of its status , according to Redmond , who has since retired .
Energy Department officials were also being stymied in their efforts to address security problems at the laboratories .
After Federico Pena became energy secretary in early 1997 , a previously approved counterintelligence program was quietly placed on the back burner for more than a year , officials said .
In April 1997 , the FBI issued a classified report on the labs that recommended , among other things , reinstating background checks on visitors to Los Alamos and Sandia , officials said .
The Energy Department and the labs ignored the FBI recommendation for 17 months .
An Energy Department spokeswoman was unable to explain the delay .
Another official said , `` We could n't get an order requiring the labs to report to counterintelligence officials when the Chinese were present .
All those requirements had been waived . ''
In early 1997 , with the FBI 's investigation making scant progress and the Energy Department 's counterintelligence program in limbo , Trulock and other intelligence officials began to see new evidence that the Chinese had other , ongoing spy operations at the weapons labs .
But Trulock was unable to quickly inform senior U.S. officials about the new evidence .
He asked to speak directly with Pena , the energy secretary , but had to wait four months for an appointment .
In an interview , Pena said he did not know why Trulock was kept waiting until July but recalled that he `` brought some very important issues to my attention and that 's what we need in the government . ''
Pena immediately sent Trulock back to the White House -- and to Berger .
`` In July 1997 Sandy was briefed fully by the DOE on China 's full access to nuclear weapons designs , a much broader pattern '' said one White House official .
Officials said Berger was told that there was evidence of several other Chinese espionage operations that were still under way inside the weapons labs .
That news , several officials said , raised the importance of the issue .
The suspected Chinese thefts were no longer just ancient history , problems that had happened on another administration 's watch .
Berger quickly briefed Clinton on what he had learned and kept him updated over the next few months , a White House official said .
As Trulock spread the alarm , his warnings were reinforced by CIA Director George Tenet and FBI Director Louis Freeh , who met with Pena to discuss the lax security at the labs that summer .
`` I was very shocked by it , and I went to work on shifting the balance in favor of security , '' Pena said .
He and his aides began to meet with White House officials to prepare a presidential order on lab security .
The FBI assigned more agents to the W -88 investigation , gathering new and more troubling evidence about the prime suspect .
According to officials , the agents learned that the suspect had traveled to Hong Kong without reporting the trip as required by government regulations .
In Hong Kong , officials said , the FBI found records showing that the scientist had obtained $ 700 from the American Express office .
Investigators suspect he used it to buy an airline ticket to Shanghai , inside the People 's Republic of China .
With Berger now paying close attention , the White House became deeply involved in evaluating the seriousness of the thefts and solving the counterintelligence problems at the laboratories .
Trulock 's new findings came at a crucial moment in U.S. - China relations .
Congress was examining the role of foreign money in the 1996 campaign , amid charges that Beijing had secretly funneled money into Democratic coffers .
The administration was also moving to strengthen its strategic and commercial links with China .
Clinton had already eased the commercial sale of supercomputers and satellite technology to China , and now he wanted to cement a nuclear cooperation agreement at the upcoming summit , enabling American companies to sell China new commercial nuclear reactors .
In August 1997 , Berger flew to Beijing to prepare for the October summit .
He assigned Samore , a senior NSC aide in charge of proliferation issues , to assess the damage from the Los Alamos spy case .
After receiving a briefing from Trulock in August , Samore asked the CIA 's directorate of intelligence to get a second opinion on how China had developed its smaller nuclear warheads .
It was , an NSC aide said , `` a quick study done at our request . ''
The analysts agreed that there had been a serious compromise of sensitive technology through espionage at the weapons labs , but were far less conclusive about the extent of the damage .
The CIA argued that China 's sudden advance in nuclear design could be traced in part to other causes , including the ingenuity of Beijing 's scientists .
`` The areas of agreement between DOE and CIA were that China definitely benefited from access to U.S. nuclear weapons information that was obtained from open sources , conversations with DOE scientists in the U.S. and China , and espionage , '' said a U.S. official .
`` The disagreement is in the area of specific nuclear weapons designs .
Trulock 's briefing was based on a worst-case scenario , which CIA believes was not supported by available intelligence .
CIA thinks the Chinese have benefited from a variety of sources , including from the Russians and their own indigenous efforts . ''
Samore assembled the competing teams of CIA and DOE analysts in mid- October for a meeting in his White House office that turned into a tense debate .
The CIA report noted that China and Russia were cooperating on nuclear issues , indicating that this was another possible explanation of Beijing 's improved warheads .
Trulock said this was a misreading of the evidence , which included intercepted communications between Russian and Chinese experts .
The Russians were offering advice on how to measure the success of nuclear tests , not design secrets .
In fact , Trulock argued , the Russian measurement techniques were used to help the Chinese analyze the performance of a weapon that Los Alamos experts believed was based on a U.S. design .
`` At the meeting , Notra Trulock said that he thought the CIA was underplaying the effect that successful Chinese espionage operations in the weapons labs had had on the Chinese nuclear weapons program , '' said one official .
Relying on the CIA report , Samore told Berger in late September that the picture was less conclusive than Trulock was arguing .
Officials said he began to relay that view before hearing Trulock 's rebuttal of the CIA study at the October meeting .
Samore told Berger `` there is n't enough information to resolve the debate , there is no definitive answer , but in any event this clearly illustrates weaknesses in DOE 's counterintelligence capability , '' said one official familiar with Samore 's presentation .
CIA officials strenuously deny that the agency 's analysts intended to downplay Trulock 's findings .
The FBI inquiry was stalled .
At a September 1997 meeting between FBI and Energy Department officials , Freeh concluded that the bureau did not have enough evidence to arrest the suspect , according to officials .
The crime was believed to have occurred more than a decade earlier .
Investigators did not then have sufficient evidence to obtain a secret wiretap on the suspect , making it difficult to build a strong criminal case , according to U.S. officials .
FBI officials say that Chinese spy activities are far more difficult to investigate than the more traditional espionage operations of the former Soviet Union .
But even if the bureau could n't build a case , the Energy Department could still take some action against someone holding a U.S. security clearance .
Freeh told DOE officials that there was no longer an investigative reason to allow the suspect to remain in his sensitive position , officials said .
In espionage cases , the FBI often wants suspects left alone by their employers for fear of tipping them off prematurely .
But the suspect was allowed to keep his job and retain his security clearances for more than a year after the meeting with Freeh , according to U.S. officials .
In late 1997 , the NSC did begin to draft a new counterintelligence plan for the weapons labs , and Clinton signed the order mandating the new measures in February 1998 .
In April , a former FBI counterintelligence agent , Ed Curran , was named to run a more vigorous counterintelligence office at Energy Department headquarters .
The administration explained aspects of the case to aides working for the House and Senate intelligence committees beginning in 1996 .
But few in Congress grasped the magnitude of what had happened .
In July 1998 , the House Intelligence Committee requested an update on the case , officials said .
Trulock forwarded the request in a memo to , and in conversations with , Elizabeth Moler , then acting energy secretary .
Ms. Moler ordered him not to brief the House panel for fear that the information would be used to attack the president 's China policy , according to an account he later gave congressional investigators .
Ms. Moler , now a Washington lawyer , says she does not remember the request to allow Trulock to brief Congress and denies delaying the process .
In October , Ms. Moler , then deputy secretary , stopped Trulock from delivering written testimony on espionage activities in the labs to a closed session of the House National Security Committee .
Ms. Moler told Trulock to rewrite his testimony to limit it to the announced subject of the hearing , foreign visitors to the labs , an Energy Department spokeswoman said .
The issue came up nonetheless when committee members asked follow-up questions , Energy Department officials said .
Key lawmakers began to learn about the extent of the Chinese theft of U.S. nuclear secrets late in 1998 , when a select committee investigating the transfers of sensitive U.S. technology to China , chaired by Rep. Christopher Cox , R - Calif. , heard from Trulock .
Administration officials sa that Congress was adequately informed , but leading Democrats and Republicans disagree .
Rep. Norman Dicks , D - Wash. , the ranking minority member on the House Intelligence Committee and also a member of the Cox committee , said that he and Rep. Porter Goss , R - Fla. , chairman of the House intelligence panel , were not adequately informed .
`` Porter Goss and I were not properly briefed about the dimensions of the problem , '' he said , adding : `` It was compartmentalized and disseminated over the years in dribs and drabs so that the full extent of the problem was not known until the Cox committee . ''
Last fall , midway through the Cox panel 's inquiry , a new secretary of energy , Bill Richardson , arrived on the job .
After being briefed by Trulock , Richardson quickly reinstated background checks on all foreign visitors , a move recommended 17 months earlier by the FBI .
He also doubled the counterintelligence budget and placed more former FBI counterintelligence experts at the labs .
But Richardson also became concerned about what the Cox panel was finding out .
So in October he cornered Berger at a high-level meeting and urged him to put someone in charge of coordinating the administration 's dealings with the Cox committee .
Berger turned again to Samore , officials said .
By December , Dicks , in his role as the ranking Democratic member of the Cox panel , was growing impatient with the administration 's slow response to ongoing requests from the committee and its inaction on the Los Alamos spy case .
Dicks told Richardson , a former colleague in the House , that he needed to take action , Richardson recalled .
Dicks ' complaints helped prompt Richardson to call Freeh twice in one day in December about the inquiry , an official said .
The suspect was given a polygraph , or lie-detector test , in December , by the Energy Department .
Unsatisfied , the FBI administered a second test in February , and officials said the suspect was found to be deceptive .
It is not known what questions prompted the purportedly deceptive answers .
As the FBI investigation intensified , the Cox Committee completed a 700-page secret report which found that China 's theft of US secrets had harmed U.S. national security -- saving the Chinese untold time and money in nuclear weapons research .
After hearing from both the CIA and Energy Department analysts , the bi-partisan panel unanimously came down on the side of Trulock 's assessment , officials said .
Now , the CIA and other agencies , at the request of the Cox Committee , are conducting a new , more thorough damage assessment of the case , even as the debate continues to rage throughout the intelligence community over whether Trulock has overstated the damage from Chinese espionage .
Meanwhile , Trulock has been moved from head of DOE 's intelligence office to acting deputy .
While Richardson and other Energy Department officials praise Trulock 's work and deny he has been mistreated , some in Congress suspect he has been demoted for helping the Cox Committee .
Redmond , the CIA 's former counterintelligence chief , who made his name by unmasking Soviet mole Aldrich Ames at the CIA , has no doubts about the significance of what Trulock uncovered .
He said : `` This was far more damaging to the national security than Aldrich Ames . ''
