BOSTON --
As the debate heats up over whether the United States should build a national missile defense , one of the program 's leading critics , an MIT professor , is charging the Pentagon with trying to silence him .
This week , three agents from the Pentagon 's Defense Security Service arrived unannounced at Theodore A. Postol 's office at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology .
They said they came to show the outspoken physicist classified documents , Postol said .
But Postol said he refused to look at the papers stamped `` SECRET . ''
Recalling the Army 's attempt to classify his critical analysis of Raytheon Corp. 's Patriot missile after the 1991 Gulf War , he believes the agents ' visit was a ruse to prevent him from speaking out further against the proposed antimissile system , which has already cost at least $ 60 billion .
`` I definitely saw this as potential for entrapment and a means of intimidation , '' said Postol , so miffed he wrote a letter to John Podesta , President Clinton 's chief of staff , after the Wednesday morning visit .
`` By showing me classified information , they could say I was talking about classified information .
I saw it as a means of abridging my First - Amendment rights . ''
The surprise visit came more than a month after Postol , once one of the military 's top science advisers , made headlines after a letter he wrote to the White House detailed potential pitfalls in the Clinton administration 's missile-defense plan and exposed what he says is evidence of a cover-up .
In the letter , the 54-year -old professor explained why he and many scientists believe current technology is incapable of defeating a ballistic missile attack .
The essence of his dissent is that the system being developed ca n't differentiate a potential enemy 's decoys from its warheads .
A few balloons , he said , might be sufficient to fool current or future antimissiles .
But shortly after the letter arrived at the White House , officials sent it to the Pentagon 's Ballistic Missile Defense Office .
Officials there promptly classified Postol 's findings , even though the letter had already been posted on the Internet .
The move echoed the Army 's attempt to silence the professor after the Gulf War .
Although Postol says he never received a call before the Pentagon agents popped into his office , and accuses the security service of improperly handling secret documents , a DSS spokeswoman said the agents repeatedly tried to contact the professor and followed strict protocol in presenting the information .
Caryl Clubb , a Defense Security Service spokeswoman , said the agents went to Postol 's office to deliver a letter from the service 's deputy chief of staff for industrial security .
The document detailed areas in which Postol 's White House letter contained classified information , she said .
`` The purpose of our visit was to prevent the further disclosure of classified information , '' Clubb said .
`` We in no way , shape or form meant to get him to stop speaking out . ''
But Postol and others describe the visit as a tactic they say the government has used before to silence informed dissidents with high-level security clearances .
A scientific adviser to the chief of naval operations in the 1980s , Postol has top-secret clearances at the departments of energy and defense .
Yet all the information he assembled in his White House letter , he contends , came from a lawsuit filed by a senior engineer against the military contractor TRW Inc. , which accused the contractor of sending the Pentagon fraudulent performance reports about a key portion of the antimissile system .
If Postol had consented to view the letter , he said , he would be obliged not to talk about its contents , even if the information was identical to what he previously published .
The penalty for revealing the contents of a classified document ranges from the loss of security clearances to a prison sentence .
`` This entire episode is Kafkaesque , '' said Democratic US Representative Edward J. Markey of Massachusetts , who said he plans to ask the General Accounting Office to investigate .
`` First , you have the government classifying a report raising questions about potential fraud ... then you have government agents showing up at the author 's office , trying to force him to read a classified document that he does n't want to read . ''
Joseph Cirincione , director of the Nonproliferation Center at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace , said it `` appears they were trying to force feed him classified material for reasons other than his education on this matter . ''
Jennifer Weeks , a former congressional military analyst who runs a project on nuclear policy at Harvard 's Kennedy School of Government , said the episode might have been a clumsy attempt to explain the missile program to Postol .
`` I think it 's plausible this was an effort to silence him , '' she said .
`` It also may have just been a dumb , badly managed way of showing him classified information . ''
Postol , though , has no doubts .
`` This was n't an accident , '' he said .
`` They know what they were doing . ''
