WASHINGTON --
Although the former director of central intelligence , John Deutch , had his security clearances revoked by the Central Intelligence Agency and the Defense Intelligence Agency , he has kept his security clearance at the Pentagon , a senior Defense Department official said Friday evening .
The clearance is a limited one , the official said , what he called an `` industrial clearance , '' which allows Deutch to work on specific Defense Department contracts for Raytheon , the SAIC Corp. and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , where Deutch teaches .
The official said the clearance did not give Deutch access to a wide range of intelligence information .
The official , who spoke on the condition of anonymity , said the Pentagon had no basis to revoke this limited clearance .
He said the Defense Department had not received the CIA report , which was the basis of that agency 's revoking Deutch 's clearance .
The Pentagon had requested the report some time ago , he said , but he did not know exactly when .
The fact that Deutch has kept his industrial security clearance at the Defense Department was first reported by The Washington Post on its Web site Friday evening .
Deutch worked at the Pentagon from 1993 to 1995 , first as under secretary of defense for acquisitions and technology and then as deputy secretary of defense , the No. 2 post there .
In May 1995 , he was confirmed as director of central intelligence .
After failing in his desire to become secretary of defense , Deutch stepped down as head of the CIA in December 1996 .
Deutch managed to keep CIA computers at his home after he was hired as a consultant to the agency .
In a visit to Deutch 's home in December 1996 , CIA security officials discovered classified documents on the computers .
Based on a subsequent investigation , Deutch 's security clearances were revoked by his successor at the agency , George Tenet .
Because of a reciprocal arrangement with the Defense Intelligence Agency , Deutch also lost his security clearance there .
Earlier this week , The New York Times reported that the CIA 's inspector general found that senior agency officials had not been aggressive in their investigation of Deutch 's security lapses , with one result being that an independent prosecutor was not appointed to investigate the matter .
