ANKARA , Turkey
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
President Suleyman Demirel insisted Monday that Caspian Sea oil will be transported through Turkey , despite a report claiming that companies favored a cheaper and shorter route .
`` Baku - Ceyhan will definitely be constructed , , '' Demirel told an oil conference in reference to a pipeline project running from the Azeri capital of Baku to Turkey 's Mediterranean port of Ceyhan .
`` It is the safest route and has the backing of the United States . ''
Demirel 's optimism conflicted with Sunday 's report in The New York Times that U.S. efforts for the Turkish project appeared to be failing .
Azerbaijan 's oil reserves in the Caspian Sea , which started flowing through a preliminary Russian pipeline last fall , are considered to be the world 's richest after the Middle East .
According to the newspaper , companies from the United States and seven other nations are expected to announce Oct. 29 that they will rely on a much shorter and cheaper pipeline already being built from Azerbaijan to the port of Supsa , on Georgia 's Black Sea coast , or an enlarged pipeline along the same route .
From Georgia , the oil would be loaded into tankers and shipped through Turkey 's narrow Bosporus Strait , a proposal strongly opposed by Turkey as it would increase the risk of oil tanker accidents in the strait dividing Istanbul .
Energy Minister Cumhur Ersumer said the report was baseless , private NTV television said .
Ersumer said Turkey will sign an agreement with Georgia and Azerbaijan this month to allow the Turkish pipeline to cut through their territories .
Ersumer also indicated that Turkey would help financing the project by constructing its part of the pipeline on its own .
`` Turkey has the power to build its part of the pipeline if all three countries -LRB- Turkey , Georgia and Azerbaijan -RRB- agree on constructing the pipeline within their borders , '' Ersumer said .
The Turkish proposal foresees the construction of a 1,730-kilometer -LRB- 1,081-mile -RRB- pipeline , via Georgia , capable of carrying 50 million metric tons -LRB- 7.1 million barrels -RRB- of oil a year .
It is expected to cost dlrs 2.5 billion .
It was unclear whether Ersumer 's proposal would be officially relayed to the companies that will decide on the main route .
According to some analysts , the proposal could tip the balance in Turkey 's favor as the companies appear to base their decision on economic concerns .
Washington has favored the Baku - Ceyhan route because it would avoid crossing Iran , which has also proposed an alternative route .
-LRB- sh -RRB-
