WASHINGTON
-LRB- AP -RRB- -- Negotiations involving Azerbaijan , Turkey and major oil companies on building a pipeline to carry Caspian Sea oil to the West are progressing and may soon bear fruit , a senior U.S. official said Thursday .
Richard Morningstar , the Clinton administration 's special adviser on Caspian Basin Energy Diplomacy , also said that despite a growing number of dry wells drilled in the Caspian , he believed there was sufficient oil to make it a productive region .
He said at a briefing he expected that in the next 12 months companies and governments involved in the pipeline negotiations `` will reach some kind of agreement on guidelines that will set out a clear roadmap '' for building the 1,400 mile line that the administration favors .
It would run from Baku , Azerbaijan , to Ceyhan on Turkey 's Mediterranean coast .
Administration officials say a pipeline along this route would help stabilize the region and serve long-term U.S. interests .
Morningstar said realistic estimates put the cost of the pipeline at $ 2.3 billion to $ 3 billion , or more than $ 1 billion less than previous estimates .
The United States is giving NATO ally Turkey $ 823,000 to plan its part of the line .
The discovery of large amounts of gas and oil under and around the Caspian has attracted dozens of energy companies in search of a new bonanza .
Because the nations in the region are unstable and wedged between Russia and Iran , they also have become an arena for big power competition .
A decision on where to build the pipeline thus has geopolitical as well as economic effects .
The Clinton administration has pressed the oil companies , among them Exxon Corp. , BP Amoco PLC and Unocal Corp. to support the Baku - Ceyhan pipeline .
But the companies have been reluctant to proceed , given the low oil prices that are forcing them to scale back activity in the Caspian .
Azerbaijan President Geidar Aliev was supposed to have announced a decision on the pipeline route in December , based on recommendations from the 11 oil companies involved in a consortium .
But the announcement was postponed for a second time .
Alternative routes would go from Baku through Iran , which Washington opposes , or to the Georgian Black Sea port of Supsa , which Turkey opposes for environmental and safety reasons .
U.S. officials have welcomed past delays in announcing a decision , saying it was a good sign for the route through Turkey .
Morningstar said he realized economics would be the main factor in any decision `` but I believe there will be an agreement on costs '' and design and engineering projects will continue .
Asked about 25 dry holes that have been drilled in the south Caspian in recent months , Morningstar said the oil companies did not seem concerned because they had similar experiences when North Sea fields off Scotland were being developed .
`` Some of the original predictions the Caspian being a new Middle East may have been overstated but the companies are moving forward with exploration , not backing away , Morningstar said .
`` There is sufficient oil in the Caspian to make it a productive area . ''
In a report last year the State Department estimated that the Caspian region 's possible reserves could reach 178 billion barrels .
But several independent consulting firms now place total probable reserves in the region at about one-tenth the original U.S. government estimate , or 17.8 billion barrels .
