ANKARA , Turkey
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Sending a strong statement to oil companies on what route to pick for oil from the petroleum-rich Caspian Sea , Turkey and four former Soviet republics signed a declaration Thursday supporting the U.S. -backed Turkish route .
The as-yet-unbuilt pipeline linking the Azeri capital of Baku to the Mediterranean port of Ceyhan is a costly option for Western oil companies , which are said to prefer a cheaper and shorter route .
Estimates on how much the Baku - Ceyhan pipeline would cost range from dlrs 2.5 billion to dlrs 4 billion .
Nonetheless , the presidents of Turkey , Azerbaijan , Kazakstan , Uzbekistan and Georgia pointed at the Baku - Ceyhan route as their preference and pledged to `` take all the necessary measures to create favorable conditions for the investors . ''
`` Now the issue is not whether Baku - Ceyhan is going to happen , because it is going to happen .
The issue is how , '' said U.S. Energy Secretary Bill Richardson , who witnessed the signing ceremony in a show of Washington 's commitment to the project .
Turkey , supported by the United States , has said that even if oil companies were to choose another route , it would find other funding to build the pipeline , which could eventually be used to transport Kazak and Russian oil to Europe .
But Russians are proposing another route , through their territory , and Thursday 's high-level gathering seemed unable to overcome regional disputes .
Turkmenistan , expected to sign the agreement , refused to join the Ankara declaration .
A territorial dispute with Azerbaijan over an oil-rich field in the Caspian appeared to be the cause .
Turkey has offered to build its own part of the pipeline and Richardson said the five countries had agreed to propose major tax and tariff reductions to the investors .
`` It 's a framework .
Now , it 's up to the Turks to really start negotiating with the companies , '' said Zeyno Baran , an energy analyst .
The United States has repeatedly pledged its backing for the proposed 1,730-kilometer -LRB- 1,075-mile -RRB- Baku - Ceyhan pipeline .
Washington has announced a package of financial support , including a dlrs 823,000 grant for the pipeline , and political risk insurance for companies investing in the project .
Washington prefers to see the oil from the Caspian -- the world 's second-richest oil reserves after the Middle East -- passing through an allied country like Turkey , rather than hostile Iran , which has also proposed a route .
The companies , including British Petroleum and U.S. -based Amoco , Exxon , Pennzoil and Unocal , are expected to announce their decision Nov. 12 .
The main alternative to Baku - Ceyhan is an existing pipeline from Baku to the Georgian Black Sea port of Supsa , from where the oil would be transferred in tankers through the Bosporus .
The Baku - Supsa line , currently being renovated , is scheduled to carry early oil from the Caspian in April .
The five countries and the United States are opposed to this route .
They cite the already heavy oil tanker traffic through the narrow Bosporus strait , which has led to hundreds of accidents .
-LRB- ht/vls-ek -RRB-
