ANKARA , Turkey
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
Richard Morningstar , a U.S. envoy for Caspian energy development , sounded optimistic on Tuesday in convincing oil companies to chose Turkey as the main export route for Caspian oil .
`` I think that the AIOC position has modified because they understand the political realities of Baku - Ceyhan , '' said Morningstar in reference to the 11-company consortium .
`` They are fully prepared to reach a joint conclusion .
That is a constructive step . ''
The Clinton administration has been actively lobbying for the Turkish option which they see as a strategic goal of developing east-west oil and gas transportation corridors in central Asia , avoiding Russia and Iran .
The oil companies have been reluctant to support the Turkish route because of the high cost and uncertainty over how much oil the Caspian fields will produce .
The projected 1,730-kilometer -LRB- 1,081-mile -RRB- pipeline runs from Azeri capital Baku to Turkey 's Mediterranean port town of Ceyhan .
On Monday , Morningstar urged Turkish officials to urgently address concerns of the consortium over the financing of the pipeline .
`` As long as we can do that , I think the companies will be able to come to a conclusion , '' Morningstar said .
There is a huge discrepancy between the cost forecasts of Turkey and the consortium , which allegedly based its calculations on higher construction costs .
Morningstar said other independent studies confirmed that the cost of pipeline was closer to the Turkish estimate of dlrs 2.3 billion .
The consortium estimates the cost at dlrs 3.7 billion .
`` Over the next few weeks , it is going to be important that the companies , Turkey and Azerbaijan come together and really go over those cost numbers so that everybody is sure that we 're comparing apples and apples , '' Morningstar said .
`` I think the gap can be narrowed . ''
Turkey has offered incentives including tax exemptions to reduce construction costs .
The main alternative to Baku - Ceyhan , reportedly favored by the companies , is an existing pipeline from Baku to the Georgian Black Sea port of Supsa .
But that would involve large tanker traffic through the Turkish straits which Turkey opposes for safety and environmental reasons .
Morningstar said the companies would make a final decision on the pipeline within months .
