ANKARA , Turkey
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
A U.S. energy envoy expressed confidence Wednesday that oil companies would pick the proposed Turkish route for oil from the petroleum-rich Caspian Sea , outlining U.S. financial support to help with the cost of the still-unbuilt pipeline .
Turkey has been in intense negotiations with energy companies to push them to pick its route from the Caspian , whose reserves are believed to be the world 's largest outside the Middle East but remain largely untapped .
The companies are expected to announce their decision Nov. 12 .
Richard Morningstar , U.S. envoy for Caspian energy development , stressed U.S. support for the Turkish -backed route , which would take oil from the Azerbaijan capital of Baku across Georgia to the Turkish Mediterranean port of Ceyhan .
`` All the companies agreed that Baku - Ceyhan should be the route .
The concerns that the companies raised were commercial issues that we think are being worked out , '' Morningstar said .
The chief alternative is an existing pipeline from Baku to the Georgian Black Sea of Supsa .
Oil companies reportedly have been favoring that route , showing reluctance to invest in the estimated dlrs 2.5 billion cost of the Baku - Ceyhan pipeline .
Morningstar insisted that the financial concerns of the oil companies were being addressed by Turkey .
Turkey is offering to build its own stretch of the pipeline ; Morningstar said the Turks also were offering tax exemptions .
He outlined planned U.S. financial support for Baku - Ceyhan , including backing from the Export - Import Bank , political risk insurance from the Overseas Private Investment Corp. , and government-sponsored feasibility studies .
The presidents of Turkey , Azerbaijan , Georgia , Kazakstan , Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan are expected to sign a declaration on Thursday supporting Baku - Ceyhan .
Turkey 's main argument against other routes is the already heavy oil tanker traffic through the Bosporus strait , which has led to hundreds of accidents .
On Saturday , Foreign Minister Ismail Cem said Turkey would increase restrictions on the narrow strait , reducing tanker traffic .
`` Turkey has a legitimate interest in protecting itself from environmental and safety concerns over the overuse of the Bosporus , '' Morningstar said .
Meanwhile , the Foreign Ministry issued another warning Wednesday , advising oil companies that a `` wrong '' decision on the pipeline could lead Turkey to `` give priority to sources and producers outside the Caspian . ''
This could involve diverting Turkey 's energy imports from the Caspian to other regions such as northern Africa , Norway , and Indonesia , a ministry spokesman said .
-LRB- ht -RRB-
