ANKARA , Turkey
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
A U.S. envoy on Monday urged Turkey to urgently address concerns of an international consortium over the financing of a pipeline to carry oil from the Caspian Sea to Turkey 's Mediterranean coast .
Richard Morningstar , a U.S. envoy for Caspian energy development , said he hoped progress would be made over the next few weeks in offering incentives and credits for the pipeline that would run from Baku , Azerbaijan , to Turkey 's Mediterranean town of Ceyhan .
The oil companies are reluctant to support the project because of the high cost of the Turkish route and uncertainty over how much oil the Caspian fields will produce .
`` We will make every to effort to see that it takes place , '' said Morningstar after meeting with Turkish Energy Minister Cumhur Ersumer .
A decision from the consortium -- composed of 11 oil companies -- on whether to endorse the pipeline had been expected a month ago .
Ersumer said Morningstar was pushing Turkey to take steps that would reduce the cost and the political and economic risk of such a huge investment .
`` We agreed with them , '' said Ersumer reiterating that the project would cost dlrs 2.3 billion , cheaper than what the consortium has forecast .
The consortium estimates the cost of the 1,730-kilometer -LRB- 1,081-mile -RRB- pipeline at dlrs 3.7 billion .
The United States has also pledged financial support for Baku - Ceyhan , including backing from the Export - Import Bank , political risk insurance from the Overseas Private Investment Corp. , and government-sponsored feasibility studies .
The pipeline is a key to the Clinton administration 's broader strategic goals of developing east-west oil and gas transportation corridors in central Asia , avoiding Russia and Iran .
Last week U.S. energy secretary Bill Richardson called the Baku - Ceyhan the most sensible option to get oil from the potentially rich Caspian fields to Western markets and said that low oil prices should n't deter the construction .
But the companies were reportedly favoring a shorter and cheaper route , an existing pipeline from Baku to the Georgian Black Sea port of Supsa , from where the oil would be transferred in tankers through the Bosporus .
Turkey has threatened to restrict such shipments through the Bosporus on safety and environmental grounds .
The waterway bisects the ancient city of Istanbul .
-LRB- sh/vls -RRB-
