ANKARA , Turkey
-LRB- AP -RRB- --
President Suleyman Demirel insisted Monday that Caspian Sea oil will be transported through Turkey , despite a report claiming that companies favored a cheaper and shorter route .
`` Baku - Ceyhan will be definitely constructed , , '' Demirel told an oil conference in reference to a pipeline project running from the Azeri capital of Baku to Turkey 's Mediterranean port of Ceyhan .
`` It is the safest route and has the backing of the United States . ''
Demirel 's optimism conflicted with Sunday 's report in The New York Times that U.S. efforts for the Turkish project appeared to be failing .
Azerbaijan 's oil reserves in the Caspian Sea are considered to be the world 's richest after the Middle East .
According to the newspaper , companies from the United States and seven other nations are expected to announce Oct. 29 that they will rely on a much shorter and cheaper pipeline already being built from Azerbaijan to the port of Supsa , on Georgia 's Black Sea coast , or an enlarged pipeline along the same route .
From Georgia , the oil would be loaded into tankers and shipped through Turkey 's narrow Bosporus Strait , a proposal strongly opposed by Turkey for security concerns .
Energy Minister Cumhur Ersumer said the report was totally baseless , private NTV television said .
Ersumer said Turkey will sign an agreement with Georgia and Azerbaijan this month , to allow the Turkish pipeline to cut through their territories .
The Turkish proposal foresees the construction of a 1,730-kilometer -LRB- 1,081-mile -RRB- pipeline , via Georgia , capable of carrying 50 million metric tons -LRB- 7.1 million barrels -RRB- of oil a year .
It is expected to cost dlrs 2.5 billion .
There have been nearly 50 oil tanker accidents in the last four decades in the Bosporus , a narrow waterway that bisects Istanbul .
In several cases , leaking oil covered the waterway , causing it to be shut down to traffic for days .
Thousands of tons of oil have spilled in the accidents .
`` You can pump the oil and flush it out directly in the Mediterranean , which is a perfect market . ''
Demirel said .
Washington has favored the Baku - Ceyhan route because it would avoid crossing Iran , which has also proposed an alternative route .
Oil from Azerbaijan started flowing through a preliminary Russian pipeline last fall to Russia 's Black Sea port of Novorossisk .
-LRB- sh/vls -RRB-
