WASHINGTON --
For both financial and political reasons , the agreement to build a pipeline to carry Caspian Sea oil across Turkey , which the Clinton administration views as a strategic victory , is far from being a reality , oil executives and administration officials say .
For years , oil companies have looked at various pipeline routes to get the Caucasus region 's vast oil reserves to market .
And they have signed similar deals before , though this one looks more solid .
For the oil companies , the chosen route must be profitable .
But for the Clinton administration , the prime concern has been strategic : guaranteeing that any pipeline would skirt Russia or Iran and deny them a choke-hold over a new energy supply for the West .
The administration would also like to use the oil deal to bring several former Soviet republics into a Western -looking bloc , and to enhance the regional power of Turkey , a key NATO ally .
But whether the route agreed to last week -- which is strategically advantageous to the United States but costly for the oil companies -- can be made profitable quickly is still a big question .
So too is the nature and extent of political fallout with Russia , the loser in the deal .
The key oil company involved in the pipeline project , BP Amoco , said it would seek help from Washington to line up enough oil shipments from producers in the region to make the pipeline commercially viable .
The company , said Michael Townshend , its director of international affairs , has set a deadline of next October for raising financing and commitments to use the pipeline .
A new batch of oil from the Caspian will be ready by 2004 , and the oil companies will need to make a decision by October for where they are going to build a pipeline to carry it .
`` It 's not impossible , but it 's a stretch , '' he said .
`` The only way this is going to work is to make the pipeline as affordable as possible for shippers to put their oil down it , '' he added .
`` We 're asking the United States government to attract as much oil as possible and to attract as much financing as possible . ''
If that money is not in place in time , BP Amoco can try to get the oil out by a different route , by expanding the capacity of an existing pipeline from Baku , Azerbaijan , to Supsa , Georgia , near the Black Sea , Townshend said .
From there the oil would be taken by tanker through the Bosporus , a route less to the liking of Washington and the oil companies .
It was also possible that BP Amoco might just delay the next phase of oil production in the Caspian Sea if the structure of the pipeline deal was still not settled .
The Clinton administration has not pledged any money for the project beyond $ 500 million in loan guarantees from the Overseas Private Investment Corp. and the Export - Import Bank , officials said .
The oil companies had first hoped Washington would allow a shorter route through Iran , with an outlet at the Persian Gulf .
But this was blocked by Washington 's refusal to lift economic sanctions against Iran .
Beyond strategic considerations , the route through the narrow Bosporus also raises some environmental problems , and as they became more evident , the oil companies leaned more toward the more expensive route through Turkey .
As the oil companies wavered , Turkey tried to make the route to its port of Ceyhan more appealing by announcing it would pay for cost overruns on the estimated $ 1.4 billion the pipeline is expected to cost the oil companies .
When the deal was announced at a European summit meeting in Istanbul , Turkey , last week , it was , for Turkey , the most substantive part of President Clinton 's five-day visit there .
The other countries to sign the deal were Azerbaijan , Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan .
That victory for the Clinton administration may have as yet unseen costs , however .
Administration officials acknowledged that Russia has always viewed the pipeline route through Turkey as an implicit threat .
While the Russian reaction appeared muted last week , even the prospect of a pipeline deal had led Moscow officials to speculate publicly that Washington was trying to foment chaos on its southern borders .
Alan Makovsky , an analyst at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy , said Russia perceived Washington 's efforts in the Caspian Sea as the equivalent of NATO expansion on Russia 's southern flank .
Russia came to live with NATO 's embrace of its former satellites -- Poland , the Czech Republic and Hungary -- but how it would react to the pipeline that is designed to deprive Moscow of precious income and prestige was an open question .
`` They clearly see this as threatening , '' said a senior administration official .
`` They see this as the next phase of U.S. - Russian competition .
They do n't seem to understand that they would be better off with a stable southern flank . ''
