BAKU , Azerbaijan --
Buffeted by political and economic pressures , oil companies drilling in the Caspian Sea are postponing their much-awaited decision on where to lay their main export pipeline .
The oil consortium canceled a meeting scheduled for Thursday at which members were to discuss pipeline routes .
No date for another meeting was announced .
The Clinton administration is lobbying intensely for a route across Turkey that would favor U.S. interests .
Russia and Iran have proposed routes of their own .
This heavy political crossfire , coupled with low oil prices and uncertainty about how much oil lies beneath the Caspian , has made the companies reluctant to choose .
Under a 1994 contract between Azerbaijan and 11 foreign companies , including four from the United States , the companies were to have chosen an export route by last month .
When that deadline passed , executives said they would probably decide in November , but now that seems unlikely .
`` We do n't have a deadline for a decision , '' said Pamela Mounter , spokeswoman for the consortium .
`` There are a lot of meetings going on with governments and organizations .
This is a pipeline for the long term , and it 's much too important to be rushed into . ''
Diplomats and oil executives said the postponement would give Turkey time to improve its offer to the companies .
U.S. officials are urging Turkey to offer subsidies big enough to close what oil executives call the `` billion-dollar gap '' between the cost of this route and others .
The postponement also reflects oil executives ' hopes that U.S. policy toward Iran could change , making a pipeline through Iran possible .
`` The companies never say it publicly , but they are very much hoping that if they wait long enough , they will be able to build their pipeline through Iran , which is the route most of them favor , '' a European ambassador said .
`` So the decision that is supposed to be coming soon may well be no decision at all . ''
Sen. Richard Shelby , R - Ala. , chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence , visited Azerbaijan this week and said that he fervently hopes for an improvement in Iranian - U.S. relations that would make a pipeline there possible .
`` That would be the cheapest and the shortest route , '' Shelby said in an interview .
`` I 'd like to see it happen .
Lots of us in Congress would like to see relations with Iran improve tremendously .
`` I hope there will be a thaw , a real one .
We 'd go the first mile and probably the last mile .
But the other side has to meet us .
Iran has to show that it can be relied on as far as controlling terrorism and other things that would help strengthen the family of nations . ''
The outcome of the pipeline contest , which is being closely followed in many capitals , could hinge in part on whether a second oil consortium strikes it rich in a promising Caspian field called Shah Deniz .
The Shah Deniz consortium does not include any U.S. companies , so it would be free to support a pipeline through Iran .
Geological data suggest that Shah Deniz could be a very rich field , but results of the first test drilling will not be known until early next year .
If they confirm high estimates , the pipeline picture could change suddenly .
`` We 're not here to play politics ; we 're here to make money , '' said Mike Shearman , a British Petroleum executive who heads the Shah Deniz consortium .
`` We 'd be foolish to rule out any option . ''
During a recent visit to Istanbul , Turkey , President Clinton 's special envoy to the Caspian region , Richard Morningstar , urged the companies to weigh their options `` in a broader political and economic context '' and not to ignore `` political considerations and political realities . ''
On his return to Washington , Morningstar acknowledged that it was unlikely that the oil companies would decide to build a pipeline to Turkey anytime soon .
But he said any statement they make about their intentions should include a `` concrete commitment '' to build a line to Turkey at some point in the future and a pledge to begin `` intense negotiations '' with Turkey over ways to bring down the cost of the line .
`` I do n't think you 'll see a decision this year , '' said Brian Chipman , an investment adviser based in Baku .
`` There may be some statements or even signatures , but nothing firm as far as committing money .
The companies want to put things off as long as possible . ''
