ISTANBUL , Turkey --
Four nations in the Caspian Sea region took a giant step Thursday toward embracing one of President Clinton 's cherished foreign policy projects , a pipeline that would assure Western control over the region 's vast oil and natural gas reserves .
At a ceremony in Istanbul , the presidents of Georgia , Azerbaijan , Kazakhstan and Turkey agreed to support construction of an oil pipeline that would bring Caspian oil to ports in the West on a route that does not pass through Russia or Iran .
Construction of this pipeline , estimated at $ 2.4 billion , would give the United States and other Western countries access to an important new source of energy .
But the main significance was that it would draw the new nations near the Caspian , which were part of the Soviet Union only a decade ago , away from Russia and give the United States greater influence in the region .
The accord was signed Thursday during a summit meeting of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe .
Only hours earlier , in the main summit hall , Clinton and other Western leaders had faced off against Russian President Boris Yeltsin over the conflict in Chechnya .
They were unable to persuade Yeltsin to end his war against Chechen separatists , but their success in engineering the pipeline accord could eventually prove to have far greater significance in weakening Russia 's hold over the volatile Caucasus and Central Asia .
`` This is a major foreign policy victory , '' Energy Secretary Bill Richardson said after the signing .
`` It is a strategic agreement that advances America 's national interest . ''
There was no official reaction from the Russian government .
Thursday 's accord does not guarantee that the pipeline to the West will be built .
Any pipeline would have to be paid for by oil companies and their partners , led by BP Amoco PLC , the Anglo - American energy company , and they have warned that they will make their decision based on commercial rather than political considerations .
With Thursday 's agreement , oil company executives said they would now begin trying to arrange financing for the project .
Just how much oil lies beneath the Caspian and in its surrounding lands is subject to some debate .
Oil experts say there is probably at least as much oil as in the North Sea fields and possibly as much as half of the reserves under Saudi Arabia .
Still , the uncertainty has made it difficult to arrange financing for pipelines in a volatile region .
For several years , the United States has been courting the leaders of Caspian nations , telling them that their future lies not with Russia or Iran but with the West .
Thursday 's accord suggests that they agree .
The pipeline that the United States supports would begin in Azerbaijan 's capital , Baku , cross Georgia and Turkey , and end at Turkey 's Mediterranean port of Ceyhan .
From there , Caspian oil would be pumped onto tankers and shipped to Western countries .
In order to assure that there will be enough oil to fill the pipeline , American negotiators have been pressing Kazakhstan , which lies on the opposite side of the Caspian , to ship its oil and gas to Baku through an undersea link .
John S. Wolf , the chief U.S. envoy to the Caspian region , predicted that construction of the pipeline could begin in 2001 , and that oil would begin flowing through it `` by the first quarter of 2004 , '' a crucial date in the minds of some oil companies in the region .
They believe that increased amounts of oil will be produced in the Caspian by then , and that unless the new pipeline is completed , there will be insufficient means to transport it to market .
For now , much of the oil moves by ship through the narrow Bosporus and by some existing pipelines .
Wolf said Turkey had guaranteed that building the Turkish segment of the pipeline , which is by far the longest , would cost the companies no more than $ 1.4 billion .
If it costs more , Wolf said , the Turkish government will assume the liability .
Outside powers have been waging an intense political battle for control of Caspian energy resources and the political influence that those resources represent .
All agree that the battle is not simply about oil and gas , but will shape the future of one of the world 's most turbulent regions .
Russia has dominated the Caspian region for more than a century , and considers it part of its natural sphere of influence .
Iran , which is also competing for a decisive role in the region , has deep historic and ethnic ties to Azerbaijan , where the Caspian energy boom is centered .
It offers what is probably the cheapest alternative for a pipeline .
Many oil executives prefer that route , but U.S. sanctions against Iran make it all but impossible to build , at least for the time being .
Some executives noted , however , they might be able to wait for the possibility that the sanctions might be lifted .
Russia offered a third alternative route from Baku , but it passes through Chechnya and is considered unreliable .
Leaders in the region have often expressed their preference for the Baku - Ceyhan route , and have signed several agreements to build it .
Thursday 's accord , however , seemed more substantial than the others .
`` This one is a real step forward , '' said a Western diplomat posted in Baku who was skeptical of past declarations .
`` The big difference is that now , the Turks really seem to have guaranteed the cost . ''
Michael Townshend , director of international affairs at BP Amoco , said Thursday 's agreement `` actually cemented the terms so we could now go and take it to interested parties to see if they want to invest in it . ''
In addition to the American and European companies involved in this pipeline , he said , other energy companies working in the region would be approached , including Chevron , Texaco and Mobil , for financial backing .
Outsiders from Genghis Khan to Tamerlane to Hitler have waged war to control the region around the Caspian .
The more recent attraction has been the huge energy potential both under the Caspian Sea and around it .
Since the collapse of the Soviet Union , the region has appeared to float freely , its leaders anxious for ties to the West but fearing the consequences of breaking from their longtime masters in Moscow .
The accord signed Thursday was accompanied by an `` intergovernmental declaration '' of intent to build a second major pipeline .
It would bring the enormous gas resources of Turkmenistan to gas-starved Turkey through a pipeline that would be laid under the Caspian to Baku .
From there it would follow a route roughly parallel to the Baku - Ceyhan pipeline through Georgia , and then into some unspecified point in Turkey .
If both this line and the oil line from Baku to Ceyhan are built , the West will have won control over the key resource of Central Asia and the Caucasus .
This control would not be without risk .
All three of the energy-rich nations around the Caspian -- Azerbaijan , Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan -- are ruled by autocratic former Communists .
All are crippled by spectacular corruption and a rapidly expanding gap between rich and poor .
None has passed laws to assure that some of their expected oil wealth will reach their poor and expectant masses .
`` What was signed today is only a step forward if it can be converted into something real , and it 's not at all clear that it can be converted fast enough to make difference in these states , '' Martha Brill Olcott , an American scholar who is a leading expert on the Caucasus and Central Asia , said in a telephone interview from Washington .
`` It 's a sign of activity , but you have to ask whether it will make these states more stable , or even whether these states will still exist in a few years as they do today . ''
`` These regimes will have to deal with crises of succession and popular expectation long before the big oil money starts flowing , and that 's not even taking the threat of Islamic fundamentalism into consideration. , '' Ms. Olcott said .
`` We 're talking about four or five years down the line , which is half the lifetime of these states . ''
`` This is an important first step , and of course it 's better to have a plan than not to have a plan .
But Chechnya is just the beginning of what we 're going to face in this region .
Russia is not going to sit back quietly as , from its perspective , the United States tries to undermine its vital strategic interests there . ''
