ISTANBUL , Turkey --
Leaders of countries around the Caspian Sea declared Thursday that they want to export their new-found oil along a pipeline route favored by the United States .
Competition for the pipeline is reaching a peak as oil companies prepare to announce which route they favor .
They may make their choice as early as next month .
The United States , Russia and Iran have each proposed routes that would favor their political and economic interests .
The choice could have long-term strategic implications in the Caspian region and beyond .
In Thursday 's declaration , regional leaders `` strongly confirmed their determination '' to see the pipeline built on the U.S. -backed route .
President Heydar Aliyev of Azerbaijan said he and his counterparts had signed `` a declaration of historic importance . ''
He predicted that the pipeline would be `` the most shining peace project of the 21st century . ''
But because oil companies and not governments will pay for whichever pipeline is built , the declaration was largely symbolic .
It increased political pressure on oil executives but did nothing visible to lessen the costs of what they consider an excessively expensive option .
Joining Aliyev at Thursday 's signing were the presidents of Georgia , Turkey , Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan .
There was one surprise absentee , President Saparmurad Niyazov of Turkmenistan , who has at times proved a prickly partner for the United States .
Secretary of Energy Bill Richardson flew to Ankara , Turkey 's capital , on Thursday to witness signing of the declaration and drum up last-minute support for the U.S. -backed route .
Richardson was the latest in a stream of Clinton administration officials who have passed through the region in recent days .
They are pressing for a route that would run from Baku , the Azerbaijani capital , to the Turkish port of Ceyhan on the Mediterranean .
`` Hard work remains to be done to build this pipeline , and today the presidents committed to doing it , '' Richardson said .
`` From today , we are no longer talking about whether we will have a pipeline from Baku to Ceyhan .
We are talking about how . ''
Richardson won a modest breakthrough Thursday on an issue that had threatened to spread discord in the region .
He emerged with an agreement by Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan to submit their sensitive border dispute to his mediation .
The two countries disagree over ownership of potentially rich tracts under the Caspian .
Diplomats said that under the plan agreed to Thursday , which was not publicly announced , Richardson would seek to offer a solution to the border dispute within four months .
Neither side would be required to accept his solution , but there would be considerable pressure for both to do so .
U.S. officials are urging Turkey to offer the oil companies inducements to build along the Baku - Ceyhan route .
They say Turkey has begun to do so .
