`` Sanctions are a drag on our business position , '' said Cecil Davidson , operations manager in Turkmenistan for Halliburton International Inc. , a supplier of oil and gas equipment .
`` The competition gains strength because of it .
They can operate in Iran and we ca n't . ''
Lobbyists for American energy companies are pressing for an end to the sanctions , and some prominent figures in the foreign policy establishment support them .
In a speech this month , former Secretary of State Cyrus Vance urged new overtures to Iran .
Graham Fuller , a Rand Corp. analyst and former CIA official , recently called for `` a process of reconciliation '' based on `` a remarkable number of common interests , '' including Caspian energy .
Iranian officials have begun courting Western oil and gas companies .
`` The route through Iran is the most economical , and the companies know this , '' said Alireza Bikdeli , Iran 's ambassador in Azerbaijan .
`` They know this region very well , perhaps better than the U.S. government . ''
Caspian nations do not share the United States ' desire to isolate Iran .
They must live as Iran 's neighbors , and would rather cooperate than feud .
`` We 'll take into consideration that the United States opposes routes through Iran , '' said Recepbay Arazov , the oil and gas minister in Turkmenistan , `` but we 're not scared off . ''
Oil executives looking for a way to bring their crude out of Azerbaijan have only three or four main alternatives .
But huge amounts of oil and gas will also be coming from two countries on the eastern shore of the Caspian , Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan .
Competition there involves a much wider group of players .
Turkmenistan has huge reserves of natural gas , but its only export pipeline runs through Russia .
Because Russia is itself a gas producer , it refuses to accept competing gas at fair prices .
After a bitter argument in 1997 , Turkmenistan turned off its spigot .
Now Turkmenistan has gone more than a year without earning a cent from its gas reserves , and it has nothing else to sell .
The government is living on bank loans , mostly from Germany .
So President Saparmurat Niyazov is negotiating with Royal/Dutch Shell to build a $ 4 billion pipeline across Iran to gas-starved Turkey .
`` This guy ca n't wait , '' said Omer Ertur , the chief United Nations representative in Turkmenistan .
`` He 's in a financial crisis .
He 's up to his neck in debt and he 's paying for a series of colossal projects .
If there 's no pipeline , there 's going to be instability here . ''
The largest of the new Caspian nations , Kazakhstan , is also hoping to escape from Russia 's shadow .
Kazakh leaders have approved the construction of an oil pipeline across Russia to the Black Sea , but they also want a non- Russian option .
They are pushing for a line under the Caspian to Azerbaijan , from which their oil could be shipped westward to Georgia and beyond .
`` Of course Russia will not agree with this project , and will try to block it , '' said Ermukahmet Ertsybaev , director of the Kazakhstan Institute of Strategic Studies .
`` It would have a huge political impact .
We have been isolated from the world system , and this would be our link to Europe .
It would make our independence real , and also the independence of Azerbaijan and Georgia . ''
Both Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan are also pursuing the idea of building pipelines eastward to China .
These lines would be long and expensive , but Chinese leaders remain intrigued by them .
They know that a pipeline would pull Central Asia into their sphere of influence , and guarantee energy sources for continued expansion of their economy .
Some of the outside powers seeking influence in the Caspian region are using armies to strengthen their positions .
Russia maintains bases in Georgia and Armenia .
The United States has established a much smaller but nonetheless palpable military presence .
The U.S. Army has held maneuvers in the region , brought local officers to America for training , and donated patrol boats and other military equipment to friendly regimes .
In May the Army and units of the National Guard will stage an international disaster relief exercise , using computers , in Kazakhstan .
Azerbaijan has signed a defense cooperation agreement with the United States , and others may follow .
Russia and Iran view these steps as part of a hostile plan to establish U.S. hegemony over the Caspian .
Some American experts , however , believe there is enough wealth in the region for everyone .
`` If things go well , it would be a tremendous boost to all of the surrounding powers , which are many and formidable , '' said S. Frederick Starr , chairman of the Central Asia Institute at Johns Hopkins University .
`` It would be the best thing that could happen to Russia , because it would lay to rest their imperial hangover , '' he said .
`` It would give Iran its traditional role as a trading state .
Turkey would find a position for itself among peoples with whom it has a historical connection .
China would have a new strategic connection to the West .
Pakistan and India would have chances to integrate themselves into an emerging region , rather than consume themselves with mutual hatred . ''
`` If things do n't go well , there will be a geopolitical vacuum , which is everywhere dangerous .
They invite intrusions , and this is a highly nuclear neighborhood . ''
