ALMATY , Kazakhstan --
Richard Morningstar , the White House special adviser on Caspian Sea affairs , had just fulfilled one of his principal missions -- defending the U.S. law restraining investment in Iran .
Then he got an earful .
It was Carl Burnett , president of Mobil Oil 's Kazakhstan subsidiary , who made it clear that the company would honor U.S. law , but under protest .
`` Mobil is against the sanctions on Iran , '' Burnett said at an oil conference in a downtown hotel this week .
`` We think it does more harm than good . ''
The charged dispute in this sedate , tree-lined city was another sign of the pressure on Washington and Tehran to reconcile swiftly so that , among other things , two-way trade -- severed for almost two decades -- can resume .
But it told a broader story as well -- a story of the enviable position in which , at least for now , energy-rich Kazakhstan has found itself during the global economic crisis .
Foreign investment has drained from most emerging markets , global crude prices have plummeted , and doubts have even begun to be raised as to how much oil actually lies under the Caspian .
Yet hundreds of millions of dollars have continued to pour into the region , which has maintained its stature as the most prized oil property in the world .
By urging an examination of investment prospects in Iran -- which abuts the Caspian 's southern shore -- rather than discussing how to get out , Burnett has underscored how interest in this former Soviet region seems to persist almost unchanged .
`` Obviously there is concern , '' Morningstar said at a news conference on Thursday , `` but generally there is a belief among the companies that the demand for oil and gas , while affected to some extent , will still be substantial . ''
Virtually every global oil company has bought oil or natural gas fields in this Central Asian republic of 17 million people since it won independence in the 1991 Soviet breakup .
The oil grab has been part of a regionwide frenzy that has encompassed Azerbaijan and , to a lesser degree , Turkmenistan .
In all , foreign companies have already pledged some $ 50 billion in energy investment in the area around the Caspian , the world 's largest inland sea .
To some experts , the level of interest -- motivated by estimates ranging up to a staggering 200 billion barrels of oil in the region as a whole -- has been premature and perhaps even unjustified .
Much attention , for example , has been attracted by an unproven offshore Kazakhstan oilfield called Kashagan .
Judging by seismic studies , geologists say the salt domes that make up Kashagan may hold a giant oilfield surpassing anything discovered on the Caspian .
Test drilling will begin only in the first half of next year .
Yet just last month , Phillips Petroleum and Japan 's Inpex paid Kazakhstan an up-front bonus of $ 500 million for a one-seventh share of Kashagan .
`` That was a lot of money for an unproven field , '' said a senior U.S. oil executive at the conference , who insisted on not being identified .
`` But it shows how much these companies want to be part of it in case it hits . ''
This week , neither the industry slump nor Russia 's economic chaos kept more than 400 oil executives from gathering in Almaty for a two-day conference .
And the dominant topic involved their greatest test of tenacity -- their long wait for a solution to the Caspian 's main problem , its lack of a reliable way to transport oil to market .
Unlike the Middle East , this area is landlocked , and it has no independent export pipeline .
As a Soviet -era legacy , all the region 's pipelines instead traverse Russia , which has routinely obstructed the export of oil and natural gas from its former colonies .
Morningstar , who coordinates White House efforts to counterbalance Russia and Iran on the Caspian , said he expected the first sign of a resolution this month .
Chiefly , by the end of October a U.S. -dominated foreign consortium in Azerbaijan is to announce whether it supports a key element of a White House -sponsored East - West Transportation Corridor , bypassing both Russia and Iran .
The administration envisions the construction of pipelines from Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan across the Caspian to a hub in the Azerbaijan capital of Baku .
From Baku , the line would continue on through Georgia to the Turkish Mediterranean port of Ceyhan , hence averting either a Russian or Iranian chokehold on Caspian energy .
The Azerbaijan consortium is deciding whether to endorse that plan , or a Moscow -backed proposal to build the pipeline instead to the Russian Black Sea port of Novorossisk .
`` Baku - Ceyhan offers the best option to address our mutual strategic interests , '' Morningstar asserted .
Moreover , Morningstar said he expected final Moscow approval this month on a separate , $ 2.3 billion , 960-mile pipeline from a giant Kazakhstan oilfield called Tengiz , which is being developed by a consortium led by Chevron and Mobil .
The pipeline would also end at Novorossisk .
The recent thaw in relations between Washington and Tehran has undermined some of the rationale for the administration 's refusal to consider what some view as the most economical idea -- a pipeline crossing Iran , which abuts the Caspian 's southern shore .
Since 1996 , American law has threatened sanctions against any company , from the United States or abroad , investing more than $ 20 million in Iran .
But suddenly investor interest in Iran has appeared far more credible , particularly in recent months as Iran has opened up some of its fields .
Among U.S. companies , Mobil has led efforts to repeal the law .
Mobil has asked the administration to allow it to `` swap '' oil with Iran -- that is , to ship some of its Tengiz crude across the Caspian to northern Iran .
In exchange , Iran would deliver an equivalent volume to Mobil ships at the Gulf port of Kharg .
Burnett , of Mobil 's Kazakhstan subsidiary , said the company also favored the construction of a trans- Iranian pipeline from the Caspian .
