ISTANBUL , Turkey --
Prospects for quick construction of an American -backed oil pipeline from the Caspian Sea were set back further this week when a senior oil executive said the countries supporting it do not seem willing to help pay for it .
`` We understand the political importance of this route , '' said the executive , John Leggate , who heads the consortium of oil companies that is considering pipeline routes .
`` Nevertheless , not a single country supporting it has suggested it would participate in financing the project . ''
Leggate did not name any countries , but the three through which the pipeline would pass are Azerbaijan , Georgia and Turkey .
Clinton administration officials are lobbying hard for the route because it would favor American interests , but have concluded that it is politically impossible for them to subsidize it .
They want Turkey to do so , and in recent weeks Turkey has offered concessions on taxes and transit fees .
But Leggate 's comments suggested that these concessions are far from enough .
`` The difference between the cheaper and the most expensive options could be $ 500 million a year , '' he said Thursday at a news conference in Baku , the capital of Azerbaijan , where the Caspian Sea oil boom is centered .
`` We will seek a route that will be profitable even at very low oil prices . ''
The route favored by the United States would run from Baku to Ceyhan , Turkey , on the Mediterranean .
Leggate said a pipeline along this route would cost $ 3.7 billion , compared with $ 1.8 billion for a shorter route to Georgia .
He said the companies are also considering rebuilding an old but functioning pipeline to the Russian port at Novorossisk , which he estimated would cost $ 2.5 billion .
Reports last month that oil companies were unwilling to recommend the Baku - Ceyhan route provoked a flurry of statements and trips to the Caspian region by Clinton administration officials .
They insisted that the Baku - Ceyhan line is the best choice despite its cost .
The United States favors this route because it passes through pro- American countries and would bind them closer to Western interests .
It would also avoid Russia and Iran , which are promoting routes of their own .
But oil companies say they cannot build such an expensive pipeline with their own resources .
Leggate said the consortium would meet to consider various routes on Dec. 4 but probably would not make a final choice .
He also said low oil prices had led the companies to delay at least six months a project to develop a new Caspian field known as Azeri - Chyrag - Guneshli .
When asked if he was among executives who long for an end to American sanctions on Iran so they can build their main export pipeline there , Leggate said it was `` not appropriate '' for him to reply .
The consortium includes American companies , and therefore cannot choose the Iran route as long as sanctions remain in place .
It was probably Leggate 's last public appearance for the consortium , the Azerbaijan International Operating Co .
The consortium announced on Friday that he will be replaced on Jan. 1 by David Woodward , an engineer with British Petroleum , who is currently stationed in Moscow .
The Clinton administration has staked much prestige on the Baku - Ceyhan project , but Leggate 's statements were only the latest in a stream of warnings from executives and others that it does not yet make financial sense .
Leaders of countries in the region signed a declaration last month pledging support for the project , but their pledge included no financial commitments and has evidently not altered the equation .
`` In spite of their backing , the project does seem rather ill-starred , '' Jan R. Prins , a banker involved in financing large energy projects , told oil executives this month in London .
`` Additional capital contributions or price guarantees are needed from those countries that attach such great political importance to this particular export route . ''
