WASHINGTON --
A two-year campaign by the Clinton administration to convince major oil companies that they should quickly build a multi-billion-dollar pipeline in the Caucasus , a campaign that has become a centerpiece of American foreign policy , appears to be on the brink of failure .
Companies from the United States and seven other nations are to make a decision later this month about how to begin transporting the vast amounts of oil that are believed to lie under and around the Caspian Sea .
For the region 's fragile new nations , wedged between Russia and Iran , the decision may be a momentous turning point .
The Caspian region has emerged as the world 's newest stage for big-power politics .
It not only offers oil companies the prospect of great wealth , but provides a stage for high-stakes competition among world powers .
This grand rivalry has begun with an intense competition for control over pipeline routes that will carry Caspian oil to foreign markets .
Much depends on the outcome , because these pipelines will not simply carry oil but will also define new corridors of trade and power .
The nation or alliance that controls pipeline routes could hold sway over the Caspian region for decades to come .
The Clinton administration has been exerting every form of persuasion at its disposal to persuade the oil companies to choose a route that would run from Baku , the capital of oil-rich Azerbaijan , through Turkey to its Mediterranean port of Ceyhan .
But it is evidently losing the battle .
Administration officials , congressional aides and oil executives said in interviews last week that the companies will probably decide that the American -backed pipeline is too expensive to build now .
The companies are expected to announce that they will rely on a much shorter pipeline that is already being built from Azerbaijan to the port of Supsa , on Georgia 's Black Sea coast , or an enlarged pipeline along the same route .
From Georgia , the oil would be loaded into tankers and shipped across the Black Sea toward Europe -- a move that not only would deny potentially billions of dollars in revenue to Turkey , a U.S. ally , but would mean a sharp increase in oil tanker traffic through the narrow Bosporus strait , which Turkey strenuously opposes .
The decision is expected to be announced on Oct. 29 , and a senior executive of the oil consortium , Robin Branagan , asserted in a telephone interview from Baku that `` at the moment all options are still open . ''
Officials in Washington , however , expect that the American -backed route will not be chosen .
They are already debating how serious a setback it is for the administration and the security interests of the United States .
`` It 's a disappointment , but I would n't call it a defeat , '' said Sen. Sam Brownback , R - Kan .
`` Half a loaf is better than nothing .
The oil is going to come out on an east-west axis , rather than south through Iran or north through Russia .
And Baku - Ceyhan may still happen down the road . ''
The oil companies are expected to couch their announcement in terms that will be as reassuring as possible to all parties and to include a pledge to build the Baku - Ceyhan pipeline someday .
But that is not enough to console some in Washington who have worked hard to secure an immediate commitment .
`` I think it is a defeat , to be honest , '' said a State Department official who concentrates on Caspian issues .
`` We pushed this project to the top of our agenda , but we were n't able to provide the sweeteners or whatever was necessary to get it done .
We wanted to get something for nothing .
It 's a setback for our commercial interests and certainly for our prestige .
It 's another case of talking big but not backing up what we say . ''
Brownback said one reason the United States was not able to impose its will on the oil companies was that President Clinton has `` lost the power of moral persuasion '' because of scandals that surround him .
But there are more tangible factors at play .
Among them are the low price of oil , which made the companies reluctant to embrace a project that could cost $ 4 billion or more ; uncertainty about how much oil the Caspian will produce over the next few years , and hope that U.S. sanctions against Iran may soon collapse , making a pipeline through Iran possible .
The administration favored the Baku - Ceyhan route because it would pass through only relatively friendly countries -- Azerbaijan , Georgia and Turkey -- and would bind them closer to the West ; because it would pull Azerbaijan and Georgia out of the Russian shadow ; and because it would not pass through either Russia or Iran , both of which have offered routes of their own .
Unfortunately for the administration , however , the Baku - Ceyhan route is also the longest and most expensive to build of all proposed routes .
Last year the oil companies discreetly asked the Clinton administration if it would be willing to pay part of the cost of building its favored Baku - Ceyhan pipeline .
They were told that any such payment would be viewed as a government handout to the oil industry , and was therefore politically impossible .
Unable to subsidize the Baku - Ceyhan line themselves , U.S. officials urged Turkey , through which most of the line would run , to offer the companies a generous package of incentives and tax breaks .
They said this week that Turkey never produced such a package , and complained that the instability of Turkey 's government has made it a difficult partner .
`` Oil companies sometimes do n't even know who they should be negotiating with over there , '' asserted one oil consultant .
`` We kept telling the Turks that they had to come to the table with something to offer , but it did n't work .
Now of course they 're going to be very upset , but in part they brought this on themselves . ''
Administration officials are working to assure that the text of the companies ' announcement is as positive to U.S. interests as possible .
Several said that given economic realities , they could understand a decision by the companies to build a pipeline only as far as Georgia .
`` It would reflect the difficulty of getting a consensus on all the cost issues at a time of low oil prices and of anxiety about large capital investments , '' said Ambassador -at- Large Stephen Sestanovich , who has helped shape U.S. policy toward Caspian countries .
`` Given all this , the companies naturally want to be cautious . ''
`` We 're committed to making Baku - Ceyhan happen , '' Sestanovich said .
`` A couple of years ago people did n't take the idea of an east-west corridor seriously at all .
Now everyone can see it 's just a matter of time . ''
An oil company executive involved in making the pipeline decision said that by building a pipeline to Georgia , the companies would be responding to U.S. concerns .
`` They have received what they want , which is an east-west route , but in a phased approach , '' the executive said .
`` Most things in life come in stages .
If you 're going to build a huge new house , do you build it all now or start small and expand it as you need it ?
That 's how we 're thinking . ''
A pipeline from Baku to Georgia 's Black Sea coast is already under construction , but it will not have enough capacity to handle the heavy volumes of oil that are expected to be shipped from the Caspian in coming years .
The fact that a right of way already exists , however , would make construction of a larger-capacity pipeline relatively easy .
It is still unclear what the companies will do with their oil once it arrives at the Black Sea .
The Bosporus is the only maritime route out of the Black Sea .
It runs through the center of Istanbul and is already overcrowded .
Turkish officials say it cannot sustain a sharp increase in tanker traffic .
Foreign Minister Ismail Cem of Turkey , in a telephone interview , declined to comment on the oil companies ' deliberations until they officially announce their conclusion .
But he said competition for pipeline routes would shape events in the Caspian region for decades to come .
`` It creates a new complex of economic and strategic issues that will shape the next century , '' Cem said .
`` Certain countries in the region will become big players in world affairs , and countries outside the region are anxious to press their own interests .
The rivalry , the competition for influence , has already begun . ''
