ISTANBUL , Turkey --
With the discovery of great energy reserves in countries around the Caspian Sea , a vast new region has catapulted onto the world stage .
It not only offers oil companies the prospect of great wealth .
It gives outside powers a place to test their strength .
The United States is waging a strong campaign to win decisive influence in the Caspian .
So are Russia , Iran and other powers in the region .
These grand rivalries have turned the Caspian into the world 's newest stage for big-power politics .
`` We are at the beginning of what will be a massive oil boom , '' said Stanley Escudero , the U.S. ambassador to Azerbaijan .
`` It means that Azerbaijan and this whole region are about to emerge as major players in the world energy game , and also as a vitally important area for the whole world . ''
Officially the United States supports cooperation in the Caspian , saying it wants every country except Iran to prosper .
Some U.S. diplomats in the region , however , sense that they are involved in a modern version of the 19th-century Great Game , in which Britain and Russia competed for dominance there .
`` This is where we prove we 're still the big boy on the block , '' said one diplomat .
`` China , Europe , Iran , Russia and all the others want to see if they can take us down .
All of our so-called friends and all of our so-called enemies want control of this region . ''
Today 's game is being played out in an intense competition for oil and gas pipeline routes .
The nations that win will be able to help shape events in the region for decades to come .
The Clinton administration is lobbying intensely for an oil pipeline route from Azerbaijan across Georgia and Turkey to the Mediterranean .
This would tie Azerbaijan and Georgia to the West and be a boon to Turkey , a key NATO ally .
U.S. officials are applying every form of encouragement and pressure they can muster to persuade oil companies to choose it .
The companies are skeptical .
They say the U.S. -backed line is far too expensive to build without a subsidy of $ 1 billion or more .
By their calculations , a line across Georgia to the Black Sea would cost less than half as much .
Since oil companies will pay for whatever pipeline is built , they are in the catbird seat , and governments in the Caspian area are fervently wooing them .
`` In a reversal of history , '' said Chevron Overseas Petroleum president Richard Matzke , `` the industry today is showing its potential to drive geopolitical events , rather than be driven by them . ''
In Washington , meanwhile , some members of Congress warn that the United States must be wary of anti- American forces in the Caspian .
They want the Clinton administration to work with the American oil companies to establish a stronger U.S. presence .
These legislators support bills like the Silk Road Strategy Act proposed by Sen. Sam Brownback , R - Kan. ; it would finance programs in the region ranging from support for independent newspapers to `` transfer of excess defense articles . ''
Critics counter that the United States should not help Caspian countries as long as they reject democracy , especially if a hidden agenda is to smooth the way for big business .
Sen. Paul Sarbanes , D - Md. , has suggested that the Silk Road Act be renamed `` the oil and gas interests bill . ''
Russian leaders are highly suspicious of U.S. ambitions in the Caspian , which they view as a naked power grab .
Russia has controlled the region for more than a century and is angry at what it sees as an aggressive U.S. campaign to wrest it away .
`` We cannot help seeing the uproar stirred up in some Western countries over the energy resources of the Caspian , '' Russian President Boris Yeltsin told a newspaper interviewer last year .
`` Some seek to exclude Russia from the game and undermine its interests .
The so-called ` pipeline war ' in the region is part of this game . ''
Small amounts of Caspian oil are now being shipped through a Soviet -era pipeline that runs north from Baku , the Azerbaijani capital , to the Russian port of Novorossisk on the Black Sea .
Russia proposes that the main export pipeline be built along this route , rather than across Turkey as the United States wants .
A pipeline across Russia would help keep Caspian nations under Moscow 's thumb .
But leaders of new nations in the region are determined to break free of Russian influence .
To do that , they must have an export route that Russia does not control .
`` I want to be the head of my family , '' reasoned Ahmed Zeynalov , an Azerbaijani oil executive .
`` Would you put your neighbor in the position of being able to control your family ? ''
In addition to this political problem , there are practical ones .
The Russian route runs through Chechnya , hardly known for its stability .
And even if Caspian oil can be brought across Russia to the Black Sea , no one is certain how it would be sent on from there .
Turkey , suddenly discovering its environmental conscience , says it cannot bear more tanker traffic through the already crowded Bosporus to the Mediterranean .
Therefore , Turkish officials say , the only solution is to build a pipeline across their country .
But Bulgaria , Romania and Ukraine are offering an alternative : send the oil across the Black Sea to our ports and from there to Western Europe .
This option gives oil companies another card to play when they ask Turkey for billion-dollar subsidies .
In their hearts , many American oil executives believe the best export route for Caspian oil is through Iran .
They cannot choose that route now because sanctions imposed by Congress forbid large investments in Iran .
But they refuse to write off the idea , preferring to stall in the hope that the sanctions will collapse .
`` Sanctions are a drag on our business position , '' said Cecil Davidson , operations manager in Turkmenistan for Halliburton International Inc. , a supplier of oil and gas equipment .
`` The competition gains strength because of it .
They can operate in Iran and we ca n't . ''
Lobbyists for American energy companies are pressing for an end to the sanctions , and some prominent figures in the foreign policy establishment support them .
In a speech this month , former Secretary of State Cyrus Vance urged new overtures to Iran .
Graham Fuller , a Rand Corp. analyst and former CIA official , recently called for `` a process of reconciliation '' based on `` a remarkable number of common interests , '' including Caspian energy .
Iranian officials have begun courting Western oil and gas companies .
`` The route through Iran is the most economical , and the companies know this , '' said Alireza Bikdeli , Iran 's ambassador in Azerbaijan .
`` They know this region very well , perhaps better than the U.S. government . ''
Caspian nations do not share the United States ' desire to isolate Iran .
They must live as Iran 's neighbors , and would rather cooperate than feud .
`` We 'll take into consideration that the United States opposes routes through Iran , '' said Recepbay Arazov , the oil and gas minister in Turkmenistan , `` but we 're not scared off . ''
Oil executives looking for a way to bring their crude out of Azerbaijan have only three or four main alternatives .
But huge amounts of oil and gas will also be coming from two countries on the eastern shore of the Caspian , Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan .
Competition there involves a much wider group of players .
Turkmenistan has huge reserves of natural gas , but its only export pipeline runs through Russia .
Because Russia is itself a gas producer , it refuses to accept competing gas at fair prices .
After a bitter argument in 1997 , Turkmenistan turned off its spigot .
Now Turkmenistan has gone more than a year without earning a cent from its gas reserves , and it has nothing else to sell .
The government is living on bank loans , mostly from Germany .
So President Saparmurat Niyazov is negotiating with Royal/Dutch Shell to build a $ 4 billion pipeline across Iran to gas-starved Turkey .
`` This guy ca n't wait , '' said Omer Ertur , the chief United Nations representative in Turkmenistan .
`` He 's in a financial crisis .
He 's up to his neck in debt and he 's paying for a series of colossal projects .
If there 's no pipeline , there 's going to be instability here . ''
The largest of the new Caspian nations , Kazakhstan , is also hoping to escape from Russia 's shadow .
Kazakh leaders have approved the construction of an oil pipeline across Russia to the Black Sea , but they also want a non- Russian option .
They are pushing for a line under the Caspian to Azerbaijan , from which their oil could be shipped westward to Georgia and beyond .
`` Of course Russia will not agree with this project , and will try to block it , '' said Ermukahmet Ertsybaev , director of the Kazakhstan Institute of Strategic Studies .
`` It would have a huge political impact .
We have been isolated from the world system , and this would be our link to Europe .
It would make our independence real , and also the independence of Azerbaijan and Georgia . ''
Both Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan are also pursuing the idea of building pipelines eastward to China .
These lines would be long and expensive , but Chinese leaders remain intrigued by them .
They know that a pipeline would pull Central Asia into their sphere of influence , and guarantee energy sources for continued expansion of their economy .
Some of the outside powers seeking influence in the Caspian region are using armies to strengthen their positions .
Russia maintains bases in Georgia and Armenia .
The United States has established a much smaller but nonetheless palpable military presence .
The U.S. Army has held maneuvers in the region , brought local officers to America for training , and donated patrol boats and other military equipment to friendly regimes .
In May the Army and units of the National Guard will stage an international disaster relief exercise , using computers , in Kazakhstan .
Azerbaijan has signed a defense cooperation agreement with the United States , and others may follow .
Russia and Iran view these steps as part of a hostile plan to establish U.S. hegemony over the Caspian .
Some American experts , however , believe there is enough wealth in the region for everyone .
`` If things go well , it would be a tremendous boost to all of the surrounding powers , which are many and formidable , '' said S. Frederick Starr , chairman of the Central Asia Institute at Johns Hopkins University .
`` It would be the best thing that could happen to Russia , because it would lay to rest their imperial hangover , '' he said .
`` It would give Iran its traditional role as a trading state .
Turkey would find a position for itself among peoples with whom it has a historical connection .
China would have a new strategic connection to the West .
Pakistan and India would have chances to integrate themselves into an emerging region , rather than consume themselves with mutual hatred . ''
`` If things do n't go well , there will be a geopolitical vacuum , which is everywhere dangerous .
They invite intrusions , and this is a highly nuclear neighborhood . ''
