ISTANBUL , Turkey --
The Clinton administration , increasing the pressure on oil companies to build a pipeline for Caspian Sea oil that suits U.S. interests , said Wednesday that it would give Turkey $ 823,000 to help plan its part of the line .
As oil company executives appear close to making a recommendation on a pipeline route , the United States is making a major push for a plan that would send oil across Turkey to the Mediterranean port of Ceyhan .
Administration officials say a pipeline along this route would help stabilize the region and serve long-term U.S. interests .
`` Over all , Baku - Ceyhan offers the best option from environmental , economic and strategic standpoints , '' said Undersecretary of State Stuart Eizenstat .
`` No one should underestimate our determination to make Baku - Ceyhan a reality . ''
Oil companies favor the U.S. -backed pipeline route but believe that its projected cost of $ 2.8 billion makes it too costly to build anytime soon .
Indeed , some executives believe that the project could cost $ 4 billion or more .
Eizenstat 's announcements were apparently part of a last-minute campaign to make it more economical .
`` The idea is to give Turkey financial help to lay the groundwork for this project , '' said an official in Ankara who was briefed on this week 's meetings .
`` It 's to help Turkey prepare a financial package , figure out how to line up financing and firm up details of the route . ''
Executives of oil companies active in the Caspian region said Wednesday that they still favor a shorter pipeline route running from Baku , the capital of oil-rich Azerbaijan , to the Georgian port of Supsa on the Black Sea .
Eizenstat concluded three days of meetings with Turkish officials on Wednesday .
He said that the Trade and Development Agency , which supports U.S. business projects abroad , would provide the money to Turkey .
He is one of several top administration officials who are traveling to push for the Baku - Ceyhan route .
Jan Kalicki , a senior Commerce Department envoy , was in Azerbaijan last weekend .
President Clinton 's special envoy to the Caspian region , Richard Morningstar , and the head of the Trade and Development Agency , are due in Istanbul next week .
The discovery of large amounts of oil and gas under and around the Caspian has attracted dozens of energy companies to what may be the century 's last big bonanza .
Because the new nations in the region are unstable and wedged into a strategic region between Russia and Iran , they have also become an arena for big-power competition .
The decision on where to build an oil-export pipeline could have profound geopolitical as well as economic effects .
Oil companies active in the Caspian -- among them Exxon , Pennzoil and the newly merged BP - Amoco -- are expected to announce soon which pipeline route they favor .
Officially they are making only a recommendation to the government of Azerbaijan .
Since they will pay for the pipeline , however , their recommendation is likely to be decisive .
A spokeswoman for the oil consortium , Pamela Mounter , said executives hoped to recommend a pipeline route next week .
`` Our contract calls for us to make a draft recommendation to the Azerbaijani government on a pipeline route . ''
Ms. Mounter said in a telephone interview from Baku .
`` The deadline is the end of this month , and we hope to meet that deadline . ''
Ms. Mounter said executives of the oil consortium were not available for comment , because `` they are working flat-out to meet the deadline . ''
Asked if their recommendation would be made public , she replied , `` Yes , to the right people . ''
An executive close to the consortium , however , said intense international interest would probably force the companies to make their recommendation fully public .
`` The recommendation is being made to Socar , '' the executive said , referring to Azerbaijan 's state-owned oil company .
`` They 've asked for a delay of a week or two because they 're still working on next year 's budget and some other matters that have to be discussed at the meeting .
It 's a legitimate delay , nothing horribly nefarious .
The basic facts have n't changed . ''
Published reports suggesting that the companies will not recommend immediate construction of a pipeline across Turkey have set off waves of protest and denial in several countries .
`` Baku - Ceyhan will definitely be constructed , '' President Suleyman Demirel of Turkey assured anxious Turks .
`` It is the safest route and has the backing of the United States . ''
In Washington , Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott told Turkish journalists that `` an obituary for the Baku - Ceyhan pipeline is at least premature and , we believe , wrong and inaccurate . ''
Clinton 's national security adviser , Sandy Berger , has announced plans to meet with senior oil executives to discuss the pipeline project .
`` Nobody seems to know what he 's going to say or to whom , '' said a specialist in Caspian oil issues who asked not to be identified .
`` It 's fairly unclear to all of us . ''
The date originally set for the companies ' announcement , Oct. 29 , is also the 75th anniversary of the founding of the Turkish Republic .
The presidents of Azerbaijan and Georgia will be in Turkey for the celebrations , and they are expected to join Demirel in a statement committing themselves to the Baku - Ceyhan route .
Since their governments will not be putting up the money for the pipeline , however , the statement will be largely symbolic .
A short-lived military uprising in Georgia this week reflected the fragility of the new nations around the Caspian , and forced a one-day halt in work on a small-gauge oil pipeline being built across Georgian territory .
President Eduard Shevardnadze of Georgia blamed the uprising on forces opposed to the construction of an oil pipeline across his country .
In the past , he has charged that Russia is fomenting instability in his country .
Russia wants the main export pipeline built across its territory instead of across Georgia .
`` For five or six years we have been doing everything possible to solve problems over the construction of the oil pipeline , and they are trying to interfere with that , '' Shevardnadze said .
`` Fortunately this adventure is over , and Georgia has shown that it can defend its democracy .
I have received many letters from big oil companies saying they are ready to continue cooperation with Georgia . ''
