BAKU , Azerbaijan --
American oil companies , the largest players on the energy-rich Caspian Sea , are expressing growing exasperation with the White House policy forbidding American investment in Iran .
Despite an overture to Iran by Secretary of State Madeleine Albright in June , the administration has insisted that geopolitical strategy outstrips the commercial advantages being ceded to European companies doing business there .
Intense lobbying by letter , in advertisements and by oil executives personally has gone nowhere in an administration that promotes commercial diplomacy but draws a line at Iran .
`` It has to be admitted there is a problem with American companies , '' Stuart Eizenstat , under secretary for economic affairs at the State Department , said in a telephone interview .
`` But this is a situation where the strategic interests of the United States are so great that they outweigh temporary advantages of American companies . ''
By moving into Iran , Eizenstat said , European companies are providing revenue that the Iranians may use to develop weapons of mass destruction .
`` This seems to be a factor the Europeans discount , '' he said .
`` We do n't have the luxury of discounting the strategic burden . ''
The conflict dramatizes an administration in agonizing flux , trying to adapt to a changed , intensely competitive global economy in which America 's allies are brazenly defying sanctions while trying also to appease a Republican -controlled Congress that adamantly supports the continued isolation of countries like Iran , Libya and Cuba .
For the first time since the fall of the shah nearly two decades ago , Iran is aggressively marketing investment opportunities , making it a particularly hot subject for American oil companies .
At a conference in London in July , European corporations lined up to bid on 43 oil and gas projects worth $ 5.6 billion offered by the state-owned Iranian National Oil Co .
In contrast the American oil companies , constrained by a sanctions law and a 1995 presidential order barring business in Iran , sent only mid-level representatives who could gather information but could not negotiate .
`` The London conference provided a great opportunity for the West Europeans to gain great advantage , '' said Archie Dunham , the president of Conoco .
`` I hope it 's only a short-term advantage . ''
In a letter to Clinton , Dunham made clear that as European companies increasingly disregard American sanctions against Iran , they are getting more than just a leg up .
In the medium to long run , American oil executives say , it is economically not realistic to exclude Iran from the development of the Caspian as the region becomes one of the world 's major energy sources .
Conoco has been a chief critic of the sanctions since the company was forced to cancel a $ 2 billion contract with Iran two years ago , only to watch this May as the United States granted a French -led consortium a waiver from sanctions for the same deal .
The consortium included Total SA of France , Gazprom of Russia and Petronas of Malaysia .
Clinton granted the waiver in return for an agreement by the three countries to clamp down on the sale of nuclear technology to Iran .
The 1996 Iran - Libya Sanctions Act , in addition to barring American business from the two countries , imposes penalties against any company from any nation investing more than $ 20 million there .
Dunham told Clinton that he supported the waiver even though Conoco 's competitors benefited , but he warned that the European companies were gaining long-term advantages in Iran .
`` It is clear that the governments of the foreign companies investing in Iran are prepared to defend the actions of their corporations , '' Dunham wrote .
`` This is because Iran is important to the economic and national development of the Caspian region . ''
-LRB- MORE -RRB- nn Some American companies see Iran , one of five countries that border the landlocked Caspian Sea , not only as a place for exploration but also as an economic route for transporting energy to Western markets .
But the administration has put considerable diplomatic effort into promoting countries that were once part of the Soviet Union -- Azerbaijan , Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan -- as new sources of energy that bypass both Russia and Iran .
Increasingly , oil companies that have already started extracting oil and gas from the Caspian are questioning the wisdom of an administration-backed plan that would put oil in a lengthy and expensive pipeline from Baku to the Mediterranean port of Ceyhan in Turkey .
The administration likes this idea because it anchors Turkey , a NATO ally , in the quest for oil and avoids Iran .
Expressing the growing disquiet about the proposed pipeline , an American oil executive here said , `` We do n't want to be stuck with a white elephant . ''
As an indication of the complexities of the questions , the administration has appointed a coordinator for Caspian Sea issues .
He is Richard Morningstar , who has been director of American aid in the countries of the former Soviet Union .
Mobil and Conoco have led the effort to persuade the administration to be more flexible .
Conoco has proposed that American companies be permitted to invest the same amount as foreign companies -- $ 20 million each annually .
In May , Mobil sponsored advertisements in two newspapers asking that U.S. companies be permitted to `` swap '' oil with Iran -- deliver Caspian crude for use in Iran 's northern cities , then pick up an equivalent volume at the country 's southern port of Kharg Island .
The advertisements also suggested that the companies be allowed to negotiate deals with Iran , with the understanding that these would remain unconsummated until sanctions are lifted -- a precedent established in Vietnam before the trade embargo there was abolished in 1994 .
Finally , the advertisements asked for the repeal of a ban on the use of Iranian equipment on the Caspian , a move that would free American companies to participate with partners who use Iranian -supplied equipment .
Industry leaders have been watching the progress of an application for the swap waiver that Mobil made to the Treasury Department in April , perceiving it as a bellwether of administration policy .
Eizenstat , the under secretary , said the application had not yet been considered at the highest levels .
But he said swaps were not a `` simple solution '' to the Caspian 's transportation problems , and asserted that they `` could create a dangerous dependency on Iran . ''
Even if the United States appears unlikely to budge much , oil industry analysts said the pressure will continue to build .
They cited a recent trip to Tehran by Italian Prime Minister Romano Prodi , followed by a delegation of top European Union leaders .
Industry analysts expect more European leaders to visit .
Both British Petroleum and Shell operate offices in Tehran .
Recently BP also sent crude oil samples from Azerbaijan to Iran .
Conoco officials said they were not entirely pessimistic .
They noted that , in her overture to Iran , secretary Albright spoke of the need for a `` road map '' to the development of relations between the United States and Iran , the same language that Conoco 's Dunham employed in his earlier appeal to Clinton .
