BAKU , Azerbaijan --
Soon after dawn each day , the promenade that runs along the shore of the Caspian Sea fills with Americans and other expatriates out for a morning run .
Many of them are Texas oilmen , and after dark they congregate at Margaritaville , a Tex - Mex restaurant that features tacos , enchiladas and refried beans .
Gas executives from Louisiana prefer the jambalaya and gumbo at another favorite haunt , the Ragin ' Cajun .
Later , some join the newly rich Azerbaijanis who pack glittery local discos .
Once a distant and sleepy outpost of the Soviet Union , Baku is a boom town where the scent of big money hangs in the air .
Huge amounts of oil and gas are believed to lie beneath the Caspian , and three new nations that share its shoreline -- Azerbaijan , Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan -- stand to reap billions of dollars from what looks like the century 's last big bonanza .
Because the Caspian region is landlocked , however , pipelines must be built to carry its oil to world markets .
Oil companies are soon to announce which route they prefer for their main export pipeline from Baku .
Many nations , including the United States , believe the decision will have profound economic and geopolitical consequences , and are lobbying intensely for their favored routes .
At stake is far more than the fate of the complex Caspian region itself .
Rivalries being played out here will have a decisive impact in shaping the post-communist world , and in determining how much influence the United States will have over its development .
`` This is about America 's energy security , which depends on diversifying our sources of oil and gas worldwide , '' said Energy Secretary Bill Richardson , who has put Caspian issues among his key priorities .
`` It 's also about preventing strategic inroads by those who do n't share our values . ''
`` We 're trying to move these newly independent countries toward the West , '' Richardson added .
`` We would like to see them reliant on Western commercial and political interests rather than going another way .
We 've made a substantial political investment in the Caspian , and it 's very important to us that both the pipeline map and the politics come out right . ''
The Clinton administration is making a final effort to persuade oil companies that they should build their pipeline across Georgia and Turkey , a route that would promote U.S. interests in the region .
Russia and Iran are pushing routes of their own , and urging the companies not to commit themselves to the U.S. -backed one .
Oil executives must weigh pressure from Washington against a backdrop of low oil prices and the worldwide economic downturn .
In this climate they are reluctant to commit themselves to multibillion-dollar investments -- especially , perhaps , the U.S. -backed proposal , which oil companies estimate will cost $ 4 billion .
This is roughly double the estimate for the other plans , which involve shorter distances .
Lands around the Caspian have been political and military battlegrounds almost since the dawn of history .
The Persian , Russian , Ottoman and British empires sacrificed countless lives and enormous amounts of treasure to secure them .
History 's most ambitious conquerors , from Genghis Khan and Tamerlane to Peter the Great and Hitler , waged campaigns here .
Early visitors to this region recorded their amazement at the gaseous `` pillars of fire '' that rose from many meadows , and at the black goo that spilled from the ground .
The 13th-century adventurer Marco Polo wrote that the goo , which we now call crude oil , was inedible but `` good for burning . ''
The very name Azerbaijan comes from an ancient Persian word meaning `` garden of fire . ''
Azerbaijan has already lived through one oil boom .
It reached its peak a century ago , led by pioneers with names like Nobel , Rothschild and Rockefeller .
Many of the Azerbaijanis who made fortunes in that boom built elegant baroque and neoclassical mansions in downtown Baku , and they stand today as links to a fabled past .
For most of this century , only two states bordered on the Caspian Sea : the Soviet Union and Iran .
Both had vast energy reserves in other places , and neither paid much attention to those under and around the Caspian .
In the early 1990s , however , the political geography of the region changed radically .
Azerbaijan , Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan emerged from the debris of the Soviet Union .
All three have come to realize that they control enough oil and gas to make them fabulously rich .
Hoping to share in that wealth , energy companies from nearly 40 nations have descended on the Caspian .
William Courtney , a senior State Department official and former ambassador to Kazakhstan and Georgia , has estimated that by 2010 , foreign companies will invest as much as $ 50 billion in Caspian oil fields alone , not counting the billions they will spend to develop gas fields and build pipelines .
The sight of well-dressed young Azerbaijanis stepping from shiny Mercedes sedans and nodding at their bodyguards as they whisper into cell phones no longer attracts attention here .
Nor do reports that one or another local `` oil shark '' has bought or ordered a lavish estate and paid for it with suitcases full of hundred-dollar bills .
Clever entrepreneurs have already made millions of dollars from the oil boom , and that is nothing compared to what may lie ahead .
From their offices here , oil executives can gaze out at a sea dotted by oil platforms .
But it is on the streets of Baku that the effect of the boom is most palpable .
New restaurants and bars seem to open every week , some bearing names like Manhattan and Shangri - La .
Bewildered pensioners , survivors from another age , wander past them begging for coins .
`` It 's not often that a whole region like this becomes available , '' said Igor Effimov , who directs Pennzoil 's operation here from an office near the ancient city wall .
`` Let 's guess that the market price for oil stays where it is now , about $ 15 a barrel , '' Effimov said .
`` Subtract about $ 5 a barrel for operating costs , transportation and taxes , '' he added .
`` What you 're left with , the amount of money that is going to hit this country could easily be $ 50 billion to $ 100 billion or more .
You and I will both be dead by the time all that money finishes flowing in , but it is just a mind-boggling number . ''
Before anyone can begin making these fortunes from Caspian oil , however , a decision must be made about where to lay the main export pipeline .
Under a 1994 contract between Azerbaijan and 11 foreign oil companies -- among them Pennzoil , Exxon and Amoco -- the companies will recommend rather than dictate a pipeline location to the Azerbaijani government .
But since they will pay for whatever pipeline is built , their recommendation carries great weight .
The Clinton administration is fervently promoting a route that runs from Baku through Georgia and Turkey to the Mediterranean .
At a port near the Turkish town of Ceyhan -LRB- pronounced JAY -han -RRB- , the oil would be loaded onto tankers for shipment to European markets .
This Baku - Ceyhan route fulfills every U.S. condition .
It passes through only countries friendly to the United States -- Azerbaijan , Georgia and Turkey -- and avoids both Russia and Iran .
It would also pull the Caspian region away from Russia 's shadow and toward the West .
Leaders of Caspian nations met in Turkey on Oct. 29 and signed a declaration favoring the U.S. -backed route .
But they did not offer any financial support to reduce its $ 4 billion estimated cost .
The Clinton administration has told oil companies that for political reasons it cannot give them large subsidies to build the Baku - Ceyhan pipeline .
Instead it is pressing Turkey to do so .
Turkish leaders are reportedly open to the idea because they badly want the pipeline , but have not yet produced a package of incentives .
Clinton 's special envoy to the Caspian countries , Richard Morningstar , is working to persuade Turkey to improve its offer , and says he believes Turkish officials are responding .
For half the estimated cost of the Baku - Ceyhan pipeline , however , oil companies might build a line either southward through Iran to the Persian Gulf or northward to the Russian port of Novorossisk on the Black Sea .
A route to Georgia 's Black Sea port of Supsa is shorter and would be even cheaper .
`` Pipelines are supposed to be built for commercial reasons , not political reasons , '' said Robert Ebel , an energy specialist at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington .
`` The plan to build through Turkey emerged as a way to help Turkey , and because our government does n't want a pipeline through Iran .
But that does n't put the project on a paying basis . ''
This attitude , which is widespread in the oil business , drives some U.S. officials to distraction .
They are deeply convinced that building a pipeline from Baku to Ceyhan is vital to the United States ' long-term security .
Oil executives , however , stubbornly insist on their right to choose the cheapest alternative .
Chevron Overseas Petroleum president Richard Matzke said the Baku - Ceyhan option favored by the United States `` probably is n't the most rational solution at the moment , '' and other oil executives agree .
As a result , some administration officials have privately concluded that the Baku - Ceyhan line is not going to be built in the next few years .
They believe the oil companies are preparing to announce that they will build a line only as far as Georgia , leaving open the possibility of a future extension to Ceyhan .
The Clinton administration is preparing to portray the decision for Georgia as a victory , on the grounds that the pipeline will be built along an `` east-west axis '' rather than north through Russia or south through Iran .
And Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott asserted recently that `` an obituary for the Baku - Ceyhan pipeline is at least premature and , we believe , wrong and inaccurate . ''
If oil companies announce that they will only build a pipeline as far as Georgia 's Black Sea coast , they must decide what to do with the oil once it reaches there .
The only maritime route out of the Black Sea is through the Bosporus , which runs through the center of Istanbul and is already so crowded that the Turkish government has announced plans to limit its ship traffic .
Officials in Bulgaria , Romania and Ukraine say they have the ideal alternative .
They want to receive Caspian oil at ports on the western shore of the Black Sea , and then send it to European markets on barges or through existing pipelines .
But U.S. officials scoff at these proposals .
`` We do n't see them as practical and we do n't see who would finance them , '' said a White House aide .
`` Baku - Ceyhan is the way to go . ''
Estimates of how much oil and gas lie in the Caspian region vary widely , often according to results of the most recent test drillings .
A few dry holes were hit last summer , and several tracts in the Azerbaijani sector turned out to contain gas instead of oil .
That news , together with low oil prices and the Asian financial crisis , has calmed the frenzy in Baku a bit .
`` There 's a very interesting split of oil people on one hand and geopoliticians on the other , '' said Thane Gustafson , a Washington -based energy consultant .
`` The geopoliticians are still breathing heavily , but for the oil people it 's more like a sigh . ''
For the new Caspian nations , the prospect of riches remains very real .
Their energy reserves are valued in the hundreds of billions or even trillions of dollars .
Without doubt they have more oil than Alaska , probably at least as much as the North Sea and possibly half as much as Saudi Arabia .
`` Estimates range from 20 to 200 billion barrels , '' said Paul Millar , a British government official who monitors developments in the Caspian .
`` The true figure is more likely somewhere in between , but it is a brave person that approaches their bank or shareholders for funding on a market estimate that could vary by plus or minus 90 percent . ''
This uncertainty has made oil companies reluctant to support multibillion-dollar pipeline projects like the one Washington is backing .
But even if the Caspian region turns out only to have as much oil as pessimists believe , its strategic importance is all but guaranteed .
`` This is not really about oil , '' said Julia Nanay , a Washington -based consultant who works with oil companies active in the Caspian .
`` It 's about defense politics and world strategy .
Whether you 're talking about containing Russian influence or helping Turkey or containing Iran or building up new states in the region , oil is just a political cover . ''
`` New oil is being found in Mexico , Venezuela , West Africa and other places , '' she added , `` but it is n't getting the same attention , because you do n't have these huge strategic rivalries .
There is no other place in the world where so many people and countries and companies are competing . ''
