ANKARA , April 30 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- --<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY"> In its energy offensive around the Caspian Sea , the United States has made a fresh headway by orchestrating a deal on Baku - Ceyhan oil pipeline in Washington over the weekend .
Georgian Foreign Minister Irakly Menagarishvili , Azeri Foreign Minister Vilayat Guliyev and Turkish Foreign Ministry official Midhat Balkan , who gathered in the U.S. capital upon `` invitation '' , initialed agreements which set the legal framework for investment in the oil pipeline from Azerbaijan to Turkey through Georgia .</ENAMEX>
With the package , the three governments are able now to put an offer to potential investors in the 2.7 billion-dollar , 1730- kilometer pipeline .
U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright , who presided over the signing ceremony , said that the development was `` a major step forward in the evolution of this east-west energy corridor . ''
President Bill Clinton said in a statement that the initialing brought the project `` a critical step closer to fruition . ''
`` I look forward to the next phase of this effort , when companies from the United States , Western Europe and Russia will work with those of Azerbaijan , Georgia , Kazakhstan and Turkey to transfer legal frameworks into commercial reality , '' said Clinton .
The pipeline , strongly favored by Clinton , will run from Azeri Capital Baku , via Georgian capital Tbilisi , to the Turkish Mediterranean port of Ceyhan .
Clinton conspicuously participated in the signing ceremony of Baku - Ceyhan accord , which was held on the sidelines of the summit of the Organization of Security and Cooperation in Europe -LRB- OSCE -RRB- in Istanbul last November .
<ENAMEX TYPE="OKAY">It was reported that Washington favors this oil route , as well as a gas route running across the Caspian Sea bed from Turkmenistan to Turkey via Azerbaijan because they avoid Iran to the south and Russia to the north .</ENAMEX>
Russian Deputy Prime Minister Viktor Khristenko , speaking at the World Economic Forum Summit in Almaty , Kazakhstan last Thursday , said the energy projects in the region can not be finalized without the participation of Russia , stressing that Moscow should be involved in tapping the region 's vast natural resources .
Russian President -elect Vladimir Putin has announced that Russia will also appoint an ambassador to be responsible for Caspian Basin energy resources , just as the United States has .
Experts in Ankara say that the move signals that Russia will pursue a more active policy .
They also observe that Moscow has speeded up its efforts to regain its influence in Caucasus and Central Asia in the wake of Putin 's election as president .
At the beginning of April , the Azerbaijan International Oil Company issued a statement announcing that prematurely produced Azerbaijan oil will begin to be pumped along the Baku - Novorossiisk -LRB- Russia 's Black Sea port -RRB- pipeline in the middle of April .
The statement also said that the Baku - Supsa -LRB- Georgia 's Black Sea port -RRB- pipeline is operating at full capacity .
Russia has also strengthened its ties with Turkmenistan .
The two former Soviet republics have decided to sign a 30-year agreement on natural gas supply .
In Kazakhstan , a high-capacity oil pipeline is being built from the Central Asian former Soviet republic to Russia 's Black Sea coast .
Meanwhile , Iran issued a thinly veiled warning to the United States at the World Economic Forum Summit last Thursday that Washington 's attempts to direct the flow of energy from the Caspian so as to bypass Iran and Russia threaten to destabilize an already volatile region .
`` If the -LRB- western -RRB- big powers intend to make this region an arena for unnecessary rivalries , the conditions will undoubtedly lead to instability and insecurity in the region , '' Iranian First President Hasan Habibi told the summit in Kazakhstan .
Echoing speeches from other delegates during two days of discussion at the summit , Habibi said that greater cooperation within the region offers the best long-term prospects .
Economy rather than politics should dictate key oil projects , he stressed .
Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister Mohammed Hossein Adeli told delegates at the summit on Friday that Iran is in talks on building a 1,500-kilometer pipeline to ship Kazakh oil to the Gulf .
`` This is the cheapest , shortest , most economically viable way to take 1.8 million barrels per day of oil over 1,500 kilometers , '' Adeli announced .
'' `` Once it gets to the Gulf it may be transported east or west ... environmentally too it is the safest option , '' he added .
Adeli estimated the total cost of the project at 1.2 billion dollars , or about half the cost of the U.S. -backed Baku - Ceyhan pipeline .
