ANKARA , July 11 -LRB- Xinhua -RRB- -- Turkish President Ahmet Necdet Sezer started his two-day official visit to Azerbaijan Tuesday in a bid to bolster already good bilateral political and commercial ties between Turkey and its Turkic -speaking ally in Central Asia .
A written statement by the Turkish Foreign Ministry said the status of bilateral relations between the two countries was defined as `` the highest and most advanced . ''
Sezer 's visit to Azerbaijan is his first official visit abroad , indicating that how much the country is important for Turkey , analysts here said .
The statement said `` this visit will contribute to further developing and institutionalizing bilateral relations which are already very close and warm almost in every field . ''
Analysts said the visit was made amid Russia 's recent efforts to reassert itself in the newly independent countries in Central Asia and Caucasus .
Russia and Turkey have been historic rivals in the region .
Since the collapse of the Soviet Union , Turkey has worked hard to increase ties with Turkic -speaking countries in the Caucasus and Central Asia , including Azerbaijan , Turkmenistan , Uzbekistan , Tajikistan , Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan .
Under the U.S. promotion , Turkey , Azerbaijan and Georgia reached an agreement on the construction of a multi-billion-dollar governmental oil pipeline to transport Caspian oil , on the sidelines of the Istanbul summit of the Organization of Security and Cooperation in Europe -LRB- OSCE -RRB- last year .
When complete , the pipeline will transport up to 50 million tons of oil per day from the Caspian Sea , through the Azeri capital of Baku , Georgia capital of Tbilisi to the southern Turkish port of Ceyhan and on to the global markets .
The parliaments of Turkey and Azerbaijan along with Georgia have approved the Baku - Ceyhan pipeline project , which has recently accelerated its construction .
Aside from the project , Turkey and Azerbaijan have started to work on the possibilities of transporting Azeri natural gas to Turkey and European markets since Azerbaijan discovered rich natural gas resources in the Caspian Sea recently .
Analysts said the Baku - Ceyhan pipeline via Turkey to western markets is of more political importance than economic significance for the U.S. , which aims to undercut the former Soviet republics ' dependence on Russia .
For Turkey , it can enjoy both political and economic gains .
Recently , Ankara said it has the `` same concern '' as Russia , China , Kazakhstan , Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan , the members of the '' Shanghai Five '' , which held a summit earlier this month in the Tajikistan capital of Dushanbe and decided to fight terrorism .
However , Ankara fears that Russia is taking advantage of the terrorist threats in the region to regain its control over the newly independent countries which face security challenges from ethnic separatism and radical religious elements .
