
 Certain small molecules and ions are key components of signaling pathways (second messengers)

Not all components of signal-transduction pathways are proteins. Many signaling pathways also involve small, nonprotein, water-soluble molecules or ions, called second messengers. (The extracellular signal molecule that binds to the membrane receptor is a pathway's "first messenger.") Because second messengers are both small and water-soluble, they can readily spread throughout the cell by diffusion. For example, as we'll see shortly, it is a second messenger called cyclic AMP that carries the signal initiated by epinephrine from the plasma membrane of a liver or muscle cell into the cell's interior, where it brings about glycogen breakdown. Second messengers participate in pathways initiated by both G-protein-linked receptors and tyrosine-kinase receptors. The two most widely used second messengers are cyclic AMP and calcium ions, Ca2+. A large variety of relay proteins are sensitive to the cytosolic concentration of one or the other of these second messengers.

Cyclic AMP

Once Earl Sutherland had established that epinephrine somehow causes glycogen breakdown without passing through the plasma membrane, the search began for the second messenger (he coined the term) that transmits the signal from the plasma membrane to the metabolic machinery in the cytoplasm.

Sutherland found that the binding of epinephrine to the plasma membrane of a liver cell elevates the cytosolic concentration of a compound called cyclic adenosine monophosphate, abbreviated cyclic AMP or cAMP (FIGURE 11.12). An enzyme built into the plasma membrane, adenylyl cyclase, converts ATP to cAMP in response to an extracellular signal--in this case, epinephrine. Adenylyl cyclase becomes active only after epinephrine binds to a specific receptor protein. Thus, the first messenger, the hormone, causes a membrane enzyme to make cAMP, which broadcasts the signal to the cytoplasm. The cAMP does not persist for long in the absence of the hormone, because another enzyme converts the cAMP to an inactive product, AMP. Another surge of epinephrine is needed to boost the cytosolic concentration of cAMP again.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-12. Cyclic AMP. Cyclic AMP (cAMP) is made from ATP by adenylyl cyclase, an emzyme embedded in the plasma membrane. Cyclic AMP functions as a second messenger that can relay a signal from the membrane to the metabolic machinery of the cytoplasm. Cyclic AMP is inactivated by phosphodiesterase, an enzyme that converts it to AMP.

Subsequent research revealed that epinephrine is only one of many hormones and other signal molecules that trigger the formation of cAMP. It also brought to light the other components of cAMP pathways, including G proteins, G-protein-linked receptors, and protein kinases (FIGURE 11.13). The immediate effect of cAMP is usually the activation of a serine/ threonine kinase called protein kinase A. The activated kinase then phosphorylates various other proteins, depending on the cell. (The complete pathway for epinephrine's stimulation of glycogen breakdown is shown later, in FIGURE 11.16.)



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-13. cAMP as a second messenger. Cyclic AMP is a component of many G-protein-signaling pathways. The signal molecule-- the "first messenger"--activates a G-protein-linked receptor, which activates a specific G protein. In turn, the G protein activates adenylyl cyclase, which catalyzes the conversion of ATP to cAMP. The cAMP then activates another protein, usually protein kinase A.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-16. Cytoplasmic response to a signal: the stimulation of glycogen breakdown by epinephrine. (a) In this signaling system, the hormone epinephrine acts through a G-protein-linked receptor to activate a succession of relay molecules, including cAMP and two protein kinases. The final protein to be activated is the cytosolic enzyme glycogen phosphorylase, which releases glucose-1-phosphate units from glycogen. (b) As discussed in the next section of the text, this pathway amplifies the hormonal signal, because the receptor protein can activate many molecules of G protein, and each enzyme molecule in the pathway can act on many molecules of its substrate, the next molecule in the cascade. The number of activated molecules given for each step is only approximate.

Further fine-tuning of cell metabolism is provided by other G-protein systems that inhibit adenylyl cyclase. In these systems, a different signal molecule activates a different receptor, which activates an inhibitory G protein.

Now that we know about the role of cAMP in G-protein-signaling pathways, we can explain in molecular detail how certain microbes cause disease. Consider cholera, a disease that is frequently epidemic in places where the water supply is contaminated with human feces. People acquire the cholera bacterium, Vibrio cholerae, by drinking contaminated water. The bacteria colonize the lining of the small intestine and produce a toxin, which is an enzyme that chemically modifies a G protein involved in regulating salt and water secretion. Because the modified G protein is unable to hydrolyze GTP to GDP, it remains stuck in its active form, continuously stimulating adenylyl cyclase to make cAMP. The resulting high concentration of cAMP causes the intestinal cells to secrete large amounts of water and salts into the intestines. An infected person quickly develops profuse diarrhea and if left untreated can soon die from the loss of water and salts.

Calcium Ions and Inositol Trisphosphate

Many signal molecules in animals, including neurotransmitters, growth factors, and some hormones, induce responses in their target cells via signal-transduction pathways that increase the cytosolic concentration of calcium ions (Ca2+). Calcium is even more widely used than cAMP as a second messenger. Increasing the cytosolic concentration of Ca2+ causes many responses in animal cells, including muscle cell contraction, secretion of certain substances, and cell division. In plant cells, calcium functions as a second messenger in signaling pathways plants have evolved for coping with environmental stresses, such as drought or cold. Cells use Ca2+ as a second messenger in both G-protein pathways and tyrosine-kinase pathways.

Although cells always contain some Ca2+, this ion can function as a second messenger because its concentration in the cytosol is normally much lower than the concentration outside the cell. In fact, the level of Ca2+ in the blood and extracellular fluid of an animal often exceeds that in the cytosol by more than 10,000 times. Calcium ions are actively transported out of the cell and are actively imported from the cytosol into the endoplasmic reticulum (and, under some conditions, into mitochondria and chloroplasts) by various protein pumps (FIGURE 11.14). As a result, the calcium concentration in the ER is usually much higher than in the cytosol. Because the cytosolic calcium level is low, a small change in absolute numbers of ions represents a relatively large percentage change in calcium concentration.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-14. The maintenance of calcium ion concentrations in an animal cell. The Ca2+ concentration in the cytosol is usually much lower (light blue) than in the extracellular fluid and ER (darker blue). Protein pumps in the plasma membrane and the ER membrane move Ca2+ from the cytosol into the extracellular fluid and into the lumen of the ER. Mitochondrial pumps, driven by chemiosmosis (see Chapter 9), move Ca2+ into mitochondria when the calcium level in the cytosol rises significantly.

In response to a signal relayed by a signal-transduction pathway, the cytosolic calcium level may rise, usually by a mechanism that releases Ca2+ from the cell's ER. The pathways leading to calcium release involve still other second messengers, diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol trisphosphate (IP3). These two messengers are produced by cleavage of a certain kind of phospholipid in the plasma membrane. FIGURE 11.15 shows how this occurs and how IP3 stimulates the release of calcium from the ER. Because IP3 acts before calcium in these pathways, calcium could be considered a "third messenger." However, scientists use the term second messenger for all small, nonprotein components of signal-transduction pathways.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-15. Calcium and inositol trisphosphate in signaling pathways. Calcium ions (Ca2+) and inositol trisphosphate (IP3) function as second messengers in many signal-transduction pathways. The process is initiated by the binding of a signal molecule to either a G-protein-linked receptor (left) or a tyrosine-kinase receptor (right). The circled numbers trace the former pathway.

In some cases, calcium ions activate a signal-transduction protein directly, but often they function by means of calmodulin, a Ca2+-binding protein present at high levels in eukaryotic cells. (In an animal cell, for example, calmodulin may represent as much as 1%  of the total protein.) Calmodulin mediates many calcium-regulated processes in cells. When calcium ions bind to it, calmodulin changes conformation and then binds to other proteins, activating or inactivating them. The proteins most often regulated by calmodulin are protein kinases and phosphatases--the most common relay proteins in signaling pathways.




