
 Cell signaling evolved early in the history of life

One topic of cell "conversation" is sex--at least for the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the fungus people have used for millennia for making bread, wine, and beer. Researchers have learned that cells of this yeast identify their mates by chemical signaling (FIGURE 11.1). There are two sexes, or mating types, called a and a. Cells of mating type a secrete a chemical signal called a factor, which can bind to specific receptor proteins on nearby a cells. At the same time, a cells secrete a factor, which binds to receptors on a cells. Without actually entering the cells, the receptor-bound molecules of the two mating factors cause the cells to grow toward each other and bring about other cellular changes. The result is the fusion, or mating, of two cells of opposite type. The new a/a cell contains all the genes of both original cells, a combination of genetic resources that provides advantages to this cell's descendants.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-1. Communication between mating yeast cells. Cells of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae use chemical signaling to identify cells of opposite mating type and initiate the mating process. The two mating types and their corresponding chemical signals, or "mating factors," are called a and a. The mating factors are peptides about 12 amino acids in length.

How is the mating signal at the yeast cell surface transduced, or changed, into a form that brings about the cellular response of mating? The process by which a signal on a cell's surface is converted into a specific cellular response is a series of steps called a signal-transduction pathway. Many such pathways have been extensively studied in both yeast and animal cells. Amazingly, the molecular details of signal transduction in yeast and mammals are strikingly similar, even though the last common ancestor of these two groups of organisms lived over a billion years ago. These similarities--and others recently uncovered between signaling systems in bacteria and plants--suggest that early versions of the cell-signaling mechanisms used today evolved well before the first multicellular creatures appeared on Earth. Scientists think that signaling mechanisms evolved first in ancient prokaryotes and single-celled eukaryotes and were then adopted for new uses by their multicellular descendants. Meanwhile, cell signaling has remained important in the microbial world. FIGURE 11.2 shows an example in a sophisticated modern bacterium.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-2. Communication among bacteria. Soil-dwelling bacteria called myxobacteria ("slime bacteria") use chemical signaling to share information about nutrient availability. When food is scarce, starving cells secrete a molecule that enters neighboring cells and stimulates them to aggregate. The cells form a structure that produces thick-walled spores capable of surviving until the environment improves. The bacteria shown here are Myxococcus xanthus.





 Communicating cells may be close together or far apart

Like microbes, cells in a multicellular organism usually communicate by releasing chemical messengers targeted for cells that may not be immediately adjacent. Some messengers travel only short distances: The transmitting cell secretes molecules of a local regulator, a substance that influences cells in the vicinity (FIGURE 11.3a). One class of local regulators in animals, growth factors, are compounds that stimulate nearby target cells to grow and multiply. Numerous cells can simultaneously receive and respond to the molecules of growth factor produced by a single cell in their vicinity. This type of local signaling in animals is called paracrine signaling.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-3. Local and long-distance cell communication in animals. In both local and long-distance signaling, only specific target cells recognize and respond to a given chemical signal.

Another, more specialized type of local signaling occurs in the animal nervous system. Here a nerve cell produces a chemical signal, a neurotransmitter, that diffuses to a single target cell that is almost touching the first cell. An electrical signal transmitted the length of the nerve cell triggers the secretion of neurotransmitter molecules into the synapse, the narrow space between the nerve cell and its target cell (often another nerve cell). Because specific nerve cells are so close together at synapses, a nerve signal can travel along a series of nerve cells from your brain to your big toe, for example, without causing unwanted responses in other parts of your body.

Local signaling in plants is not as well understood. Because of their cell walls, plants must use mechanisms different from those operating locally in animals.

Both animals and plants use chemicals called hormones for signaling at greater distances. In hormonal signaling in animals, also known as endocrine signaling, specialized cells release hormone molecules into vessels of the circulatory system, by which they travel to target cells in other parts of the body (FIGURE 11.3b). In plants, hormones sometimes travel in vessels but more often reach their targets by moving through cells (see FIGURE 39.6) or by diffusion through the air as a gas. Hormones range widely in molecular size and type, as do local regulators. For instance, the plant hormone ethylene, a gas that promotes fruit ripening and helps regulate growth, is a hydrocarbon of only six atoms (C2H4). In contrast, the mammalian hormone insulin, which regulates sugar levels in the blood, is a protein with thousands of atoms.

Cells may also communicate by direct contact, as we saw in Chapters 7 and 8. Both animals and plants have cell junctions that, where present, directly connect the cytoplasms of adjacent cells (FIGURE 11.4a on p. 200). In these cases, signaling substances dissolved in the cytosol can pass freely between adjacent cells. Moreover, animal cells may communicate via direct contact between molecules on their surfaces (FIGURE 11.4b on p. 200). This sort of signaling is important in embryonic development and in the operation of the immune system.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-4. Communication by direct contact between cells.

What happens when a cell encounters a signal? The signal must be recognized by a specific receptor molecule, and the information it carries must be changed into another form--transduced--inside the cell before the cell can respond. The remainder of the chapter discusses this process, primarily as it occurs in animal cells.





 The three stages of cell signaling are reception, transduction, and response

Our current understanding of how chemical messengers act via signal-transduction pathways had its origins in the pioneering work of Earl W. Sutherland, whose research led to a Nobel Prize in 1971. Sutherland and his colleagues at Vanderbilt University were investigating how the animal hormone epinephrine stimulates breakdown (depolymerization) of the storage polysaccharide glycogen within liver cells and skeletal muscle cells. Glycogen depolymerization releases the sugar glucose-1-phosphate, which the cell converts to glucose-6-phosphate. The cell can then use this compound, an early intermediate in glycolysis, for energy production. Alternatively, the compound can be stripped of phosphate and released into the blood as glucose, which can fuel cells throughout the body. Thus, one effect of epinephrine, which is secreted from the adrenal gland during times of physical or mental stress, is the mobilization of fuel reserves.

Sutherland's research team discovered that epinephrine stimulates glycogen breakdown by somehow activating a cytosolic enzyme, glycogen phosphorylase. However, when epinephrine was added to a test-tube mixture containing the phosphorylase and its substrate, glycogen, no depolymerization occurred. Epinephrine could activate glycogen phosphorylase only when the hormone was added to a solution containing intact cells. This result told Sutherland two things. First, epinephrine does not interact directly with the enzyme responsible for glycogen breakdown; an intermediate step or series of steps must be occurring inside the cell. Second, the plasma membrane is somehow involved in transmitting the epinephrine signal.

Sutherland's early work suggested that the process going on at the receiving end of a cellular conversation can be dissected into three stages: reception, transduction, and response (FIGURE 11.5):



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-5. Overview of cell signaling. From the perspective of the cell receiving the message, cell signaling can be divided into three stages: signal reception, signal transduction, and cellular response. When reception occurs at the plasma membrane, as shown here, the transduction stage is usually a pathway of several steps, with each molecule in the pathway bringing about a change in the next. The last molecule in the pathway triggers the cell's response. The three stages are explained in the text.


			  
		Reception. Reception is the target cell's detection of a signal coming from outside the cell. A chemical signal is "detected" when it binds to a cellular protein, usually at the cell's surface.


			  
		Transduction. The binding of the signal molecule changes the receptor protein in some way, initiating the process of transduction. The transduction stage converts the signal to a form that can bring about a specific cellular response. In Sutherland's system, the binding of epinephrine to the outside of a receptor protein in a liver cell's plasma membrane leads via a series of steps to activation of glycogen phosphorylase. Transduction sometimes occurs in a single step but more often requires a sequence of changes in a series of different molecules--a signal-transduction pathway. The molecules in the pathway are often called relay molecules.


			  
		Response. In the third stage of cell signaling, the transduced signal finally triggers a specific cellular response. The response may be almost any imaginable cellular activity--such as catalysis by an enzyme (for example, glycogen phosphorylase), rearrangement of the cytoskeleton, or activation of specific genes in the nucleus. The cell-signaling process helps ensure that crucial activities like these occur in the right cells, at the right time, and in proper coordination with the other cells of the organism.

We'll now explore the mechanisms of cell signaling in more detail.





 A signal molecule binds to a receptor protein, causing the protein to change shape

A cell targeted by a particular chemical signal has molecules of a receptor protein that recognize the signal molecule. The signal molecule is complementary in shape to a specific site on the receptor and attaches there, like a key in a lock or a substrate in the catalytic site of an enzyme. The signal molecule behaves as a ligand, the term for a small molecule that specifically binds to a larger one. Ligand binding generally causes a receptor protein to undergo a change in conformation--that is, to change shape. For many receptors, this shape change directly activates the receptor so that it can interact with another cellular molecule. For other kinds of receptors, as we'll see shortly, the immediate effect of ligand binding is more limited, mainly causing the aggregation of two or more receptor molecules.





 Most signal receptors are plasma membrane proteins

Most signal molecules are water-soluble and too large to pass freely through the plasma membrane. But as Sutherland learned for epinephrine, they can still influence cellular activity in major ways. Like yeast mating factors, most water-soluble signal molecules bind to specific sites on receptor proteins embedded in the cell's plasma membrane. Such a receptor transmits information from the extracellular environment to the inside of the cell by changing shape or aggregating when a specific ligand binds to it.

We'll see how membrane receptors work by looking at three major types: G-protein-linked receptors, tyrosine-kinase receptors, and ion-channel receptors.

G-Protein-Linked Receptors

A G-protein-linked receptor is a plasma membrane receptor that works with the help of a protein called a G protein. Many different signal molecules use G-protein-linked receptors, including yeast mating factors, epinephrine and many other hormones, and neurotransmitters. These receptors vary in their binding sites for recognizing signal molecules and for recognizing different G proteins inside the cell. Nevertheless, G-protein-linked receptor proteins are all remarkably similar in structure. They each have seven a helices spanning the membrane, as shown in FIGURE 11.6.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-6. The structure of a G-protein-linked receptor. A large family of eukaryotic receptor proteins have this secondary structure, where the single polypeptide, represented as a ribbon, has seven transmembrane a helices. For clarity, the a helices are depicted as cylinders and arranged in a straight line. Specific loops correspond to the sites where signal molecules and G-protein molecules bind; the loops labeled here are the binding sites in one particular case.

Loosely attached to the cytoplasmic side of the membrane, the G protein functions as a switch that is on or off, depending on which of two guanine nucleotides is attached, GDP or GTP. (GTP, or guanosine triphosphate, is similar to ATP.) As indicated in FIGURE 11.7 (p. 202), when GDP is bound, the G protein is inactive; when GTP is bound, the G protein is active.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-7. The functioning of a G-protein-linked receptor. This type of receptor is a membrane protein that works in conjunction with a G protein and another protein, usually an enzyme.

The steps in FIGURE 11.7b show how the appropriate chemical signal activates the entire G-protein system. When the signal molecule binds as a ligand to the extracellular side of a G-protein-linked receptor, 
			  
		 the receptor is activated, changing conformation in such a way that it, in turn, binds a specific, inactive G protein and 
			  
		 causes a GTP to displace the GDP. This activates the G protein, which then 
			  
		 binds to another protein, usually an enzyme, and alters its activity. If the enzyme is activated, 
			  
		 it can trigger the next step in the pathway.

The changes in the enzyme and G protein are only temporary, for the G protein also functions as a GTPase enzyme and soon hydrolyzes its bound GTP to GDP (FIGURE 11.7c). Now inactive again, the G protein leaves the enzyme, which returns to its original state. The GTPase function of the G protein allows the pathway to shut down rapidly when the extracellular signal molecule is no longer present.

G-protein receptor systems are extremely widespread and diverse in their functions. In addition to the functions already mentioned, they are important in embryonic development, as indicated by genetic studies. For instance, mutant mouse embryos lacking a certain G protein do not develop normal blood vessels and die in utero. Furthermore, G proteins are involved in sensory reception; in humans, for example, both vision and smell depend on such proteins. Similarities in structure among G proteins and G-protein-linked receptors of modern organisms suggest that G proteins and G-protein-linked receptors evolved very early, possibly as sensory receptors of ancient microbes.

G-protein systems are involved in many human diseases, including bacterial infections. The bacteria that cause cholera, pertussis (whooping cough), and botulism, among others, make their victims ill by producing toxins that interfere with G-protein function. Drugs for treating infections and other kinds of diseases have often been discovered by trial and error, but pharmacologists now realize that up to 60%  of all medicines used today exert their effects by influencing G-protein pathways.

Tyrosine-Kinase Receptors

Among the chemical signals impinging on cells in an animal's body are growth factors, the local regulators that stimulate cells to grow and reproduce. As we'll see in Chapter 12, cell reproduction involves a variety of activities by different parts of the cell, including protein synthesis in the cytoplasm, chromosome duplication in the nucleus, and the rearrangement of elements of the cytoskeleton. Helping the cell regulate and coordinate these activities is a type of receptor specialized for triggering more than one signal-transduction pathway at once.

The receptor for a growth factor is often a tyrosine-kinase receptor, one of a major class of plasma membrane receptors characterized by having enzymatic activity. Part of the receptor protein on the cytoplasmic side of the membrane functions as an enzyme, called tyrosine kinase, that catalyzes the transfer of phosphate groups from ATP to the amino acid tyrosine on a substrate protein. Thus tyrosine-kinase receptors are membrane receptors that attach phosphates to protein tyrosines.

Many tyrosine-kinase receptors have the structure roughly depicted in FIGURE 11.8. Before the signal molecule binds, the receptors exist as individual polypeptides. Notice that each has an extracellular signal-binding site, a single a helix spanning the membrane, and an intracellular tail containing a number of tyrosines. The binding of a signal molecule to such a receptor does not cause enough of a conformational change to activate the cytoplasmic side of the protein directly. Instead, as shown in FIGURE 11.8b, receptor activation occurs in two steps: 
			  
		 The ligand binding causes two receptor polypeptides to aggregate, forming a dimer (a protein consisting of two polypeptides). 
			  
		 This aggregation activates the tyrosine-kinase parts of both polypeptides, each of which then adds phosphates to the tyrosines on the tail of the other polypeptide. In summary, the effect of the signal molecule on a tyrosine-kinase receptor is polypeptide aggregation and phosphorylation of the receptor.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-8. The structure and function of a tyrosine-kinase receptor.

Now that the receptor protein is fully activated, 
			  
		 it is recognized by specific relay proteins inside the cell. Each such protein binds to a specific phosphorylated tyrosine, undergoing a structural change that activates it (the relay protein may or may not be phosphorylated by the tyrosine kinase). One tyrosine-kinase receptor dimer may activate ten or more different intracellular proteins simultaneously, 
			  
		 triggering as many different transduction pathways and cellular responses. The ability of a single ligand-binding event to trigger so many pathways is a key difference between these receptors and G-protein-linked receptors. Abnormal tyrosine-kinase receptors that aggregate even without ligand cause some kinds of cancer.

Ion-Channel Receptors

Some membrane receptors of chemical signals are ligand-gated ion channels. These channels are protein pores in the plasma membrane that open or close in response to a chemical signal, allowing or blocking the flow of specific ions, such as Na+ or Ca2+. Like the other receptors we have discussed, these channel proteins bind a signal molecule as a ligand at a specific site on their extracellular side (FIGURE 11.9). The shape change produced in the channel protein immediately leads to a change in the concentration of a particular ion inside the cell. Often this change directly affects cell functioning in some way. At a synapse between nerve cells, for example, it may trigger an electrical signal that propagates down the length of the receiving cell. Ligand-gated ion channels are very important in the nervous system, as are gated ion channels that are controlled by electrical signals (see Chapter 48).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-9. A ligand-gated ion-channel receptor. This receptor is a transmembrane protein in the plasma membrane that opens to allow the flow of a specific kind of ion across the membrane when a specific signal molecule binds to the extracellular side of the protein.

Intracellular Receptors

Not all signal receptors are membrane proteins. Some are proteins dissolved in the cytosol or nucleus of target cells. To reach such a receptor, a chemical messenger must be able to pass through the target cell's plasma membrane. A number of important signaling molecules can do just that because they are hydrophobic enough to cross the phospholipid interior of the membrane. Such hydrophobic chemical messengers include the steroid hormones and thyroid hormones of animals. Another chemical signal with an intracellular receptor is nitric oxide (NO), a gas; its very small molecules readily pass between the membrane phospholipids.

The behavior of testosterone is representative of steroid hormones: Secreted by cells of the testis, the hormone travels through the blood and enters cells all over the body. In target cells, which contain receptor molecules for testosterone in their cytosol, the hormone binds to the receptor protein, activating it (FIGURE 11.10). With the hormone attached, the active form of the receptor protein then enters the nucleus and turns on specific genes that control male sex characteristics.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-10. Steroid hormone interacting with an intracellular receptor.

How does the activated hormone-receptor protein turn on genes? Recall that the genes in a cell's DNA function by being transcribed into an RNA version called messenger RNA (mRNA), which leaves the nucleus and is translated into a specific protein by ribosomes in the cytoplasm (see FIGURE 5.28). Special proteins called transcription factors control which genes are turned on--that is, which genes are transcribed into mRNA--in a particular cell at a particular time. The activated testosterone receptor is a transcription factor that regulates specific genes.

By acting as a transcription factor, the testosterone receptor itself carries out the complete transduction of the signal. Most other intracellular receptors function in the same way, although many of them are already in the nucleus before the signal molecule reaches them (for example, estrogen receptors). Interestingly, many of these intracellular receptor proteins are structurally similar, suggesting an evolutionary kinship analogous to that displayed by G-protein-linked receptors. We will look more closely at hormones with intracellular receptors in Chapter 45. In the next section, we focus on signal-transduction pathways triggered by membrane receptors.





 Pathways relay signals from receptors to cellular responses

The binding of a specific signal molecule to a receptor in the plasma membrane triggers the first step in the chain of molecular interactions--the signal-transduction pathway--that leads to a particular response within the cell. Like falling dominoes, the signal-activated receptor activates another protein, which activates another molecule, and so on, until the protein that produces the final cellular response is activated. The molecules that relay a signal from receptor to response, sometimes called relay molecules, are mostly proteins. The interaction of proteins is a major theme of cell signaling. Indeed, protein interaction is a unifying theme of all regulation at the cellular level.

Keep in mind that the original signal molecule is not physically passed along a signaling pathway; in most cases, it never even enters the cell. When we say that the signal is relayed along a pathway, we mean that certain information is passed on. At each step the signal is transduced into a different form, commonly a conformational change in a protein. Very often, the conformational change is brought about by phosphorylation.





 Protein phosphorylation, a common mode of regulation in cells, is a major mechanism of signal transduction

Previous chapters introduced the concept of activating a protein by adding one or more phosphate groups to it (see FIGURE 9.2). In this chapter, we have already seen how phosphorylation is involved in the activation of tyrosine-kinase receptors. In fact, the phosphorylation of proteins is a widespread cellular mechanism for regulating protein activity. The general name for an enzyme that transfers phosphate groups from ATP to a protein is protein kinase. Unlike receptor tyrosine kinases, most cytoplasmic protein kinases act not on themselves, but on other substrate proteins; also, most phosphorylate their substrates on either of two other amino acids, serine or threonine. Such serine/threonine kinases are widely involved in signaling pathways in animals, plants, and fungi.

Many of the relay molecules in signal-transduction pathways are protein kinases, and they often act on each other. FIGURE 11.11 (p. 206) depicts a hypothetical pathway containing three different protein kinases, which create a "phosphorylation cascade." The sequence shown is similar to many known pathways, including those triggered in yeast by mating factors and in animal cells by many growth factors. The signal is transmitted by a cascade of protein phosphorylations, each bringing with it a conformational change. Each shape change results from the interaction of the charged phosphate groups with charged or polar amino acids (see FIGURE 5.15). The addition of phosphates often changes a protein from an inactive form to an active form (although in other cases phosphorylation decreases the activity of the protein).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-11. A phosphorylation cascade. In a phosphorylation cascade, a series of different molecules in a pathway are phosphorylated in turn, each molecule adding a phosphate group to the next one in line. The phosphorylation cascade shown here begins after a relay molecule activates an enzyme we call protein kinase 1. 
			  
		 Active protein kinase 1 transfers a phosphate from ATP to an inactive molecule of protein kinase 2, thus activating this second kinase. 
			  
		 Active protein kinase 2 then catalyzes the phosphorylation (and activation) of protein kinase 3. 
			  
		 Finally, active protein kinase 3 phosphorylates a protein (pink) that brings about the cell's response to the signal. The dashed arrows represent inactivation of the phosphorylated proteins; enzymes called phosphatases catalyze the removal of the phosphate groups from the proteins, making them available for reuse. The active and inactive proteins are represented by different shapes to remind you that activation is usually associated with a change in molecular conformation.

The importance of protein kinases can hardly be overstated. Fully 1%  of our own genes are thought to code for protein kinases. A single cell may have hundreds of different kinds, each specific for a different substrate protein. Together, they probably regulate a large proportion of the thousands of proteins in a cell. Among these are most of the proteins that, in turn, regulate cell reproduction. Abnormal activity of such a kinase frequently causes abnormal cell growth and contributes to the development of cancer.

For a cell to respond normally to an extracellular signal, it must have mechanisms for turning off the signal-transduction pathway when the initial signal is no longer present. The effects of protein kinases are rapidly reversed in the cell by protein phosphatases, enzymes that remove phosphate groups from proteins. At any given moment, the activity of a protein regulated by phosphorylation depends on the balance in the cell between active kinase molecules and active phosphatase molecules. When the extracellular signal molecule is not present, active phosphatase molecules predominate, and the signaling pathway and cellular response shut down.





 Certain small molecules and ions are key components of signaling pathways (second messengers)

Not all components of signal-transduction pathways are proteins. Many signaling pathways also involve small, nonprotein, water-soluble molecules or ions, called second messengers. (The extracellular signal molecule that binds to the membrane receptor is a pathway's "first messenger.") Because second messengers are both small and water-soluble, they can readily spread throughout the cell by diffusion. For example, as we'll see shortly, it is a second messenger called cyclic AMP that carries the signal initiated by epinephrine from the plasma membrane of a liver or muscle cell into the cell's interior, where it brings about glycogen breakdown. Second messengers participate in pathways initiated by both G-protein-linked receptors and tyrosine-kinase receptors. The two most widely used second messengers are cyclic AMP and calcium ions, Ca2+. A large variety of relay proteins are sensitive to the cytosolic concentration of one or the other of these second messengers.

Cyclic AMP

Once Earl Sutherland had established that epinephrine somehow causes glycogen breakdown without passing through the plasma membrane, the search began for the second messenger (he coined the term) that transmits the signal from the plasma membrane to the metabolic machinery in the cytoplasm.

Sutherland found that the binding of epinephrine to the plasma membrane of a liver cell elevates the cytosolic concentration of a compound called cyclic adenosine monophosphate, abbreviated cyclic AMP or cAMP (FIGURE 11.12). An enzyme built into the plasma membrane, adenylyl cyclase, converts ATP to cAMP in response to an extracellular signal--in this case, epinephrine. Adenylyl cyclase becomes active only after epinephrine binds to a specific receptor protein. Thus, the first messenger, the hormone, causes a membrane enzyme to make cAMP, which broadcasts the signal to the cytoplasm. The cAMP does not persist for long in the absence of the hormone, because another enzyme converts the cAMP to an inactive product, AMP. Another surge of epinephrine is needed to boost the cytosolic concentration of cAMP again.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-12. Cyclic AMP. Cyclic AMP (cAMP) is made from ATP by adenylyl cyclase, an emzyme embedded in the plasma membrane. Cyclic AMP functions as a second messenger that can relay a signal from the membrane to the metabolic machinery of the cytoplasm. Cyclic AMP is inactivated by phosphodiesterase, an enzyme that converts it to AMP.

Subsequent research revealed that epinephrine is only one of many hormones and other signal molecules that trigger the formation of cAMP. It also brought to light the other components of cAMP pathways, including G proteins, G-protein-linked receptors, and protein kinases (FIGURE 11.13). The immediate effect of cAMP is usually the activation of a serine/ threonine kinase called protein kinase A. The activated kinase then phosphorylates various other proteins, depending on the cell. (The complete pathway for epinephrine's stimulation of glycogen breakdown is shown later, in FIGURE 11.16.)



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-13. cAMP as a second messenger. Cyclic AMP is a component of many G-protein-signaling pathways. The signal molecule-- the "first messenger"--activates a G-protein-linked receptor, which activates a specific G protein. In turn, the G protein activates adenylyl cyclase, which catalyzes the conversion of ATP to cAMP. The cAMP then activates another protein, usually protein kinase A.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-16. Cytoplasmic response to a signal: the stimulation of glycogen breakdown by epinephrine. (a) In this signaling system, the hormone epinephrine acts through a G-protein-linked receptor to activate a succession of relay molecules, including cAMP and two protein kinases. The final protein to be activated is the cytosolic enzyme glycogen phosphorylase, which releases glucose-1-phosphate units from glycogen. (b) As discussed in the next section of the text, this pathway amplifies the hormonal signal, because the receptor protein can activate many molecules of G protein, and each enzyme molecule in the pathway can act on many molecules of its substrate, the next molecule in the cascade. The number of activated molecules given for each step is only approximate.

Further fine-tuning of cell metabolism is provided by other G-protein systems that inhibit adenylyl cyclase. In these systems, a different signal molecule activates a different receptor, which activates an inhibitory G protein.

Now that we know about the role of cAMP in G-protein-signaling pathways, we can explain in molecular detail how certain microbes cause disease. Consider cholera, a disease that is frequently epidemic in places where the water supply is contaminated with human feces. People acquire the cholera bacterium, Vibrio cholerae, by drinking contaminated water. The bacteria colonize the lining of the small intestine and produce a toxin, which is an enzyme that chemically modifies a G protein involved in regulating salt and water secretion. Because the modified G protein is unable to hydrolyze GTP to GDP, it remains stuck in its active form, continuously stimulating adenylyl cyclase to make cAMP. The resulting high concentration of cAMP causes the intestinal cells to secrete large amounts of water and salts into the intestines. An infected person quickly develops profuse diarrhea and if left untreated can soon die from the loss of water and salts.

Calcium Ions and Inositol Trisphosphate

Many signal molecules in animals, including neurotransmitters, growth factors, and some hormones, induce responses in their target cells via signal-transduction pathways that increase the cytosolic concentration of calcium ions (Ca2+). Calcium is even more widely used than cAMP as a second messenger. Increasing the cytosolic concentration of Ca2+ causes many responses in animal cells, including muscle cell contraction, secretion of certain substances, and cell division. In plant cells, calcium functions as a second messenger in signaling pathways plants have evolved for coping with environmental stresses, such as drought or cold. Cells use Ca2+ as a second messenger in both G-protein pathways and tyrosine-kinase pathways.

Although cells always contain some Ca2+, this ion can function as a second messenger because its concentration in the cytosol is normally much lower than the concentration outside the cell. In fact, the level of Ca2+ in the blood and extracellular fluid of an animal often exceeds that in the cytosol by more than 10,000 times. Calcium ions are actively transported out of the cell and are actively imported from the cytosol into the endoplasmic reticulum (and, under some conditions, into mitochondria and chloroplasts) by various protein pumps (FIGURE 11.14). As a result, the calcium concentration in the ER is usually much higher than in the cytosol. Because the cytosolic calcium level is low, a small change in absolute numbers of ions represents a relatively large percentage change in calcium concentration.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-14. The maintenance of calcium ion concentrations in an animal cell. The Ca2+ concentration in the cytosol is usually much lower (light blue) than in the extracellular fluid and ER (darker blue). Protein pumps in the plasma membrane and the ER membrane move Ca2+ from the cytosol into the extracellular fluid and into the lumen of the ER. Mitochondrial pumps, driven by chemiosmosis (see Chapter 9), move Ca2+ into mitochondria when the calcium level in the cytosol rises significantly.

In response to a signal relayed by a signal-transduction pathway, the cytosolic calcium level may rise, usually by a mechanism that releases Ca2+ from the cell's ER. The pathways leading to calcium release involve still other second messengers, diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol trisphosphate (IP3). These two messengers are produced by cleavage of a certain kind of phospholipid in the plasma membrane. FIGURE 11.15 shows how this occurs and how IP3 stimulates the release of calcium from the ER. Because IP3 acts before calcium in these pathways, calcium could be considered a "third messenger." However, scientists use the term second messenger for all small, nonprotein components of signal-transduction pathways.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-15. Calcium and inositol trisphosphate in signaling pathways. Calcium ions (Ca2+) and inositol trisphosphate (IP3) function as second messengers in many signal-transduction pathways. The process is initiated by the binding of a signal molecule to either a G-protein-linked receptor (left) or a tyrosine-kinase receptor (right). The circled numbers trace the former pathway.

In some cases, calcium ions activate a signal-transduction protein directly, but often they function by means of calmodulin, a Ca2+-binding protein present at high levels in eukaryotic cells. (In an animal cell, for example, calmodulin may represent as much as 1%  of the total protein.) Calmodulin mediates many calcium-regulated processes in cells. When calcium ions bind to it, calmodulin changes conformation and then binds to other proteins, activating or inactivating them. The proteins most often regulated by calmodulin are protein kinases and phosphatases--the most common relay proteins in signaling pathways.





 In response to a signal, a cell may regulate activities in the cytoplasm or transcription in the nucleus

Ultimately, a signal-transduction pathway leads to the regulation of one or more cellular activities. In the cytoplasm, a signal may cause, for example, the opening or closing of an ion channel in the plasma membrane or a change in cell metabolism. As we have discussed already, the response of liver cells to signaling by the hormone epinephrine helps regulate cellular energy metabolism. The final step in the signaling pathway activates the enzyme that catalyzes the breakdown of glycogen. FIGURE 11.16 shows the complete pathway leading to the release of glucose-1-phosphate from glycogen.

Many other signaling pathways ultimately regulate not the activity of enzymes but the synthesis of enzymes or other proteins, usually by turning specific genes on or off in the nucleus. Like an activated steroid receptor (see FIGURE 11.10), the final activated molecule in a signaling pathway may function as a transcription factor. In FIGURE 11.17, you see an example where a signaling pathway activates a transcription factor that turns a gene on: The response to the growth-factor signal is the synthesis of mRNA that will be translated in the cytoplasm into a specific protein. In other cases, the transcription factor might regulate a gene by turning it off. Often a transcription factor regulates several different genes.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-17. Nuclear response to a signal: the activation of a specific gene by a growth factor. This diagram is a simplified representation of a typical signaling pathway that leads to the regulation of gene activity in the cell nucleus. The initial signal molecule, a local regulator called a growth factor, triggers a phosphorylation cascade. (The ATP molecules that serve as sources of phosphate are not shown.) The last kinase in the sequence enters the nucleus and there activates a gene-regulating protein, a transcription factor. This protein stimulates a specific gene to be transcribed into mRNA, which then directs the synthesis of a particular protein in the cytoplasm.

All the different kinds of signal receptors and relay molecules introduced in this chapter participate in various gene-regulating pathways, as well as in pathways leading to other kinds of responses. The molecular messengers that produce gene regulation responses include growth factors and certain plant and animal hormones. Malfunctioning of growth-factor pathways like the one in FIGURE 11.17 can cause cancer, as we will see in Chapter 19.





 Elaborate pathways amplify and specify the cell's response to signals

Why are there often so many steps between a signaling event at the cell surface and the cell's response? As mentioned earlier, signaling pathways with a multiplicity of steps have two important benefits: They amplify the signal (and thus the response), and they contribute to the specificity of response.

Signal Amplification

Elaborate enzyme cascades amplify the cell's response to a signal. At each catalytic step in the cascade, the number of activated products is much greater than in the preceding step. For example, in the epinephrine-triggered pathway in FIGURE 11.16, each adenylyl cyclase molecule catalyzes the formation of many cAMP molecules, each molecule of protein kinase A phosphorylates many molecules of the next kinase in the pathway, and so on. The amplification effect stems from the fact that these proteins persist in active form long enough to process numerous molecules of substrate before they become inactive again. As a result of the signal's amplification, a small number of epinephrine molecules binding to receptors on the surface of a liver cell or muscle cell can lead to the release of hundreds of millions of glucose molecules from glycogen.

The Specificity of Cell Signaling

Consider two different cells in your body--a liver cell and a heart muscle cell, for example. Both are in contact with your bloodstream and are therefore constantly exposed to many different hormone molecules, as well as to local regulators secreted by nearby cells. Yet the liver cell responds to some signals but ignores others, and the same is true for the heart cell. And some kinds of signals trigger responses in both cells--but different responses. For instance, epinephrine stimulates the liver cell to break down glycogen, but the main response of the heart cell to epinephrine is contraction, leading to a more rapid heartbeat. How do we account for this difference?

The explanation for the specificity exhibited in cellular responses to signals is the same as the basic explanation for virtually all differences between cells: Different kinds of cells have different collections of proteins (FIGURE 11.18). The response of a particular cell to a signal depends on its particular collection of signal receptor proteins, relay proteins, and proteins needed to carry out the response. A liver cell, for example, is poised to respond appropriately to epinephrine by having the proteins listed in FIGURE 11.16, as well as those needed to manufacture glycogen.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-18. The specificity of cell signaling. The particular proteins a cell possesses determine what signal molecules it responds to and the nature of the response. The four cells in these diagrams respond to the same signal molecule (orange triangle) in different ways, because each has a different set of proteins (purple and green shapes). Note, however, that the same kinds of molecules can participate in more than one pathway.

Thus, two cells that respond differently to the same signal differ in one or more of the proteins that handle and respond to the signal. Notice in FIGURE 11.18 that different pathways may have some molecules in common. For example, cells A, B, and C all use the same receptor protein for the triangular signal molecule; differences in other proteins account for their differing responses. In cell B, a pathway triggered by a single kind of signal diverges to produce two responses; such branched pathways often involve tyrosine-kinase receptors (which can activate multiple relay proteins) or second messengers (which can regulate numerous proteins). In cell C, two pathways triggered by separate signals converge to modulate a single response. Branching of pathways and "cross-talk" (interaction) between pathways are important in regulating and coordinating a cell's responses to incoming information. Moreover, the use of some of the same proteins in more than one pathway allows the cell to economize on the number of different proteins it must make.

The signaling pathways in FIGURE 11.18 (as well as some of the other pathway depictions in this chapter) are greatly simplified. The diagrams show only a few relay molecules and, for clarity's sake, display these molecules spread out in the cytosol. If this were true in the cell, signaling pathways would operate very inefficiently, because most relay molecules are proteins, and proteins are too large to diffuse quickly through the viscous cytosol. How does a particular protein kinase, for instance, find its substrate? Recent research suggests that the efficiency of signal transduction may in many cases be increased by the presence of scaffolding proteins, large relay proteins to which several other relay proteins are simultaneously attached. For example, one scaffolding protein isolated from mouse brain cells holds three protein kinases and carries these kinases with it when it binds to an appropriately activated membrane receptor; it thus facilitates a specific phosphorylation cascade (FIGURE 11.19). In fact, researchers are finding scaffolding proteins in brain cells that permanently hold together networks of signaling-pathway proteins at synapses (see FIGURE 2.18). This hardwiring enhances the speed and accuracy of signal transfer between cells.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-19. A scaffolding protein. The scaffolding protein shown here (pink) simultaneously binds to a specific activated membrane receptor and three different protein kinases. This physical arrangement facilitates signal transduction by these molecules.

The importance of the relay proteins that serve as points of branching or intersection in signaling pathways is highlighted by the problems arising when these proteins are defective or missing. For instance, in an inherited disorder called Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS), the absence of a single relay protein leads to such diverse effects as abnormal bleeding, eczema, and a predisposition to infections and leukemia. These symptoms are thought to arise primarily from the absence of the protein in cells of the immune system. By studying normal cells, scientists found that the WAS protein is located just beneath the cell surface. The protein interacts both with microfilaments of the cytoskeleton and with several different components of signaling pathways that relay information from the cell surface, including pathways regulating immune cell proliferation. This multifunctional relay protein is thus both a branch point and an important intersection point in a complex signal transduction network that controls immune cell behavior. When the WAS protein is absent, the cytoskeleton is not properly organized and signaling pathways are disrupted, leading to the WAS symptoms.

To keep FIGURE 11.18 simple, we have not indicated the inactivation mechanisms that are an essential aspect of cell signaling. For a cell of a multicellular organism to remain alert and capable of responding to incoming signals, each molecular change in its signaling pathways must last only a short time. As we saw in the cholera example, if a signaling pathway component becomes locked into one state, whether active or inactive, dire consequences for the organism can result.

Thus, a key to a cell's continuing receptiveness to regulation is the reversibility of the changes that signals produce. The binding of signal molecules to receptors is reversible, with the result that the lower the concentration of signal molecules, the fewer will be bound at any given moment. When they leave the receptor, the receptor reverts to its inactive form. Then, by a variety of means, the relay molecules return to their inactive forms: The GTPase activity intrinsic to a G protein hydrolyzes its bound GTP; the enzyme phosphodiesterase converts cAMP to AMP; protein phosphatases inactivate phosphorylated kinases and other proteins; and so forth. As a result, the cell is soon ready to respond to a fresh signal.

This chapter has introduced you to a number of details of cellular signal processing. More important than the details, however, are the general mechanisms of cell communication--mechanisms involving ligand binding, conformational changes in proteins, interactions among proteins, cascades of interactions that transduce and amplify signals, and protein phosphorylations by kinases. As you continue through the text, you will encounter numerous examples of cell signaling. In the very next chapter, in fact, you'll learn about the enormously important role of cell signaling in the regulation of cell reproduction.




