
 Most signal receptors are plasma membrane proteins

Most signal molecules are water-soluble and too large to pass freely through the plasma membrane. But as Sutherland learned for epinephrine, they can still influence cellular activity in major ways. Like yeast mating factors, most water-soluble signal molecules bind to specific sites on receptor proteins embedded in the cell's plasma membrane. Such a receptor transmits information from the extracellular environment to the inside of the cell by changing shape or aggregating when a specific ligand binds to it.

We'll see how membrane receptors work by looking at three major types: G-protein-linked receptors, tyrosine-kinase receptors, and ion-channel receptors.

G-Protein-Linked Receptors

A G-protein-linked receptor is a plasma membrane receptor that works with the help of a protein called a G protein. Many different signal molecules use G-protein-linked receptors, including yeast mating factors, epinephrine and many other hormones, and neurotransmitters. These receptors vary in their binding sites for recognizing signal molecules and for recognizing different G proteins inside the cell. Nevertheless, G-protein-linked receptor proteins are all remarkably similar in structure. They each have seven a helices spanning the membrane, as shown in FIGURE 11.6.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-6. The structure of a G-protein-linked receptor. A large family of eukaryotic receptor proteins have this secondary structure, where the single polypeptide, represented as a ribbon, has seven transmembrane a helices. For clarity, the a helices are depicted as cylinders and arranged in a straight line. Specific loops correspond to the sites where signal molecules and G-protein molecules bind; the loops labeled here are the binding sites in one particular case.

Loosely attached to the cytoplasmic side of the membrane, the G protein functions as a switch that is on or off, depending on which of two guanine nucleotides is attached, GDP or GTP. (GTP, or guanosine triphosphate, is similar to ATP.) As indicated in FIGURE 11.7 (p. 202), when GDP is bound, the G protein is inactive; when GTP is bound, the G protein is active.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-7. The functioning of a G-protein-linked receptor. This type of receptor is a membrane protein that works in conjunction with a G protein and another protein, usually an enzyme.

The steps in FIGURE 11.7b show how the appropriate chemical signal activates the entire G-protein system. When the signal molecule binds as a ligand to the extracellular side of a G-protein-linked receptor, 
			  
		 the receptor is activated, changing conformation in such a way that it, in turn, binds a specific, inactive G protein and 
			  
		 causes a GTP to displace the GDP. This activates the G protein, which then 
			  
		 binds to another protein, usually an enzyme, and alters its activity. If the enzyme is activated, 
			  
		 it can trigger the next step in the pathway.

The changes in the enzyme and G protein are only temporary, for the G protein also functions as a GTPase enzyme and soon hydrolyzes its bound GTP to GDP (FIGURE 11.7c). Now inactive again, the G protein leaves the enzyme, which returns to its original state. The GTPase function of the G protein allows the pathway to shut down rapidly when the extracellular signal molecule is no longer present.

G-protein receptor systems are extremely widespread and diverse in their functions. In addition to the functions already mentioned, they are important in embryonic development, as indicated by genetic studies. For instance, mutant mouse embryos lacking a certain G protein do not develop normal blood vessels and die in utero. Furthermore, G proteins are involved in sensory reception; in humans, for example, both vision and smell depend on such proteins. Similarities in structure among G proteins and G-protein-linked receptors of modern organisms suggest that G proteins and G-protein-linked receptors evolved very early, possibly as sensory receptors of ancient microbes.

G-protein systems are involved in many human diseases, including bacterial infections. The bacteria that cause cholera, pertussis (whooping cough), and botulism, among others, make their victims ill by producing toxins that interfere with G-protein function. Drugs for treating infections and other kinds of diseases have often been discovered by trial and error, but pharmacologists now realize that up to 60%  of all medicines used today exert their effects by influencing G-protein pathways.

Tyrosine-Kinase Receptors

Among the chemical signals impinging on cells in an animal's body are growth factors, the local regulators that stimulate cells to grow and reproduce. As we'll see in Chapter 12, cell reproduction involves a variety of activities by different parts of the cell, including protein synthesis in the cytoplasm, chromosome duplication in the nucleus, and the rearrangement of elements of the cytoskeleton. Helping the cell regulate and coordinate these activities is a type of receptor specialized for triggering more than one signal-transduction pathway at once.

The receptor for a growth factor is often a tyrosine-kinase receptor, one of a major class of plasma membrane receptors characterized by having enzymatic activity. Part of the receptor protein on the cytoplasmic side of the membrane functions as an enzyme, called tyrosine kinase, that catalyzes the transfer of phosphate groups from ATP to the amino acid tyrosine on a substrate protein. Thus tyrosine-kinase receptors are membrane receptors that attach phosphates to protein tyrosines.

Many tyrosine-kinase receptors have the structure roughly depicted in FIGURE 11.8. Before the signal molecule binds, the receptors exist as individual polypeptides. Notice that each has an extracellular signal-binding site, a single a helix spanning the membrane, and an intracellular tail containing a number of tyrosines. The binding of a signal molecule to such a receptor does not cause enough of a conformational change to activate the cytoplasmic side of the protein directly. Instead, as shown in FIGURE 11.8b, receptor activation occurs in two steps: 
			  
		 The ligand binding causes two receptor polypeptides to aggregate, forming a dimer (a protein consisting of two polypeptides). 
			  
		 This aggregation activates the tyrosine-kinase parts of both polypeptides, each of which then adds phosphates to the tyrosines on the tail of the other polypeptide. In summary, the effect of the signal molecule on a tyrosine-kinase receptor is polypeptide aggregation and phosphorylation of the receptor.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-8. The structure and function of a tyrosine-kinase receptor.

Now that the receptor protein is fully activated, 
			  
		 it is recognized by specific relay proteins inside the cell. Each such protein binds to a specific phosphorylated tyrosine, undergoing a structural change that activates it (the relay protein may or may not be phosphorylated by the tyrosine kinase). One tyrosine-kinase receptor dimer may activate ten or more different intracellular proteins simultaneously, 
			  
		 triggering as many different transduction pathways and cellular responses. The ability of a single ligand-binding event to trigger so many pathways is a key difference between these receptors and G-protein-linked receptors. Abnormal tyrosine-kinase receptors that aggregate even without ligand cause some kinds of cancer.

Ion-Channel Receptors

Some membrane receptors of chemical signals are ligand-gated ion channels. These channels are protein pores in the plasma membrane that open or close in response to a chemical signal, allowing or blocking the flow of specific ions, such as Na+ or Ca2+. Like the other receptors we have discussed, these channel proteins bind a signal molecule as a ligand at a specific site on their extracellular side (FIGURE 11.9). The shape change produced in the channel protein immediately leads to a change in the concentration of a particular ion inside the cell. Often this change directly affects cell functioning in some way. At a synapse between nerve cells, for example, it may trigger an electrical signal that propagates down the length of the receiving cell. Ligand-gated ion channels are very important in the nervous system, as are gated ion channels that are controlled by electrical signals (see Chapter 48).



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-9. A ligand-gated ion-channel receptor. This receptor is a transmembrane protein in the plasma membrane that opens to allow the flow of a specific kind of ion across the membrane when a specific signal molecule binds to the extracellular side of the protein.

Intracellular Receptors

Not all signal receptors are membrane proteins. Some are proteins dissolved in the cytosol or nucleus of target cells. To reach such a receptor, a chemical messenger must be able to pass through the target cell's plasma membrane. A number of important signaling molecules can do just that because they are hydrophobic enough to cross the phospholipid interior of the membrane. Such hydrophobic chemical messengers include the steroid hormones and thyroid hormones of animals. Another chemical signal with an intracellular receptor is nitric oxide (NO), a gas; its very small molecules readily pass between the membrane phospholipids.

The behavior of testosterone is representative of steroid hormones: Secreted by cells of the testis, the hormone travels through the blood and enters cells all over the body. In target cells, which contain receptor molecules for testosterone in their cytosol, the hormone binds to the receptor protein, activating it (FIGURE 11.10). With the hormone attached, the active form of the receptor protein then enters the nucleus and turns on specific genes that control male sex characteristics.



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-10. Steroid hormone interacting with an intracellular receptor.

How does the activated hormone-receptor protein turn on genes? Recall that the genes in a cell's DNA function by being transcribed into an RNA version called messenger RNA (mRNA), which leaves the nucleus and is translated into a specific protein by ribosomes in the cytoplasm (see FIGURE 5.28). Special proteins called transcription factors control which genes are turned on--that is, which genes are transcribed into mRNA--in a particular cell at a particular time. The activated testosterone receptor is a transcription factor that regulates specific genes.

By acting as a transcription factor, the testosterone receptor itself carries out the complete transduction of the signal. Most other intracellular receptors function in the same way, although many of them are already in the nucleus before the signal molecule reaches them (for example, estrogen receptors). Interestingly, many of these intracellular receptor proteins are structurally similar, suggesting an evolutionary kinship analogous to that displayed by G-protein-linked receptors. We will look more closely at hormones with intracellular receptors in Chapter 45. In the next section, we focus on signal-transduction pathways triggered by membrane receptors.




