
 The three stages of cell signaling are reception, transduction, and response

Our current understanding of how chemical messengers act via signal-transduction pathways had its origins in the pioneering work of Earl W. Sutherland, whose research led to a Nobel Prize in 1971. Sutherland and his colleagues at Vanderbilt University were investigating how the animal hormone epinephrine stimulates breakdown (depolymerization) of the storage polysaccharide glycogen within liver cells and skeletal muscle cells. Glycogen depolymerization releases the sugar glucose-1-phosphate, which the cell converts to glucose-6-phosphate. The cell can then use this compound, an early intermediate in glycolysis, for energy production. Alternatively, the compound can be stripped of phosphate and released into the blood as glucose, which can fuel cells throughout the body. Thus, one effect of epinephrine, which is secreted from the adrenal gland during times of physical or mental stress, is the mobilization of fuel reserves.

Sutherland's research team discovered that epinephrine stimulates glycogen breakdown by somehow activating a cytosolic enzyme, glycogen phosphorylase. However, when epinephrine was added to a test-tube mixture containing the phosphorylase and its substrate, glycogen, no depolymerization occurred. Epinephrine could activate glycogen phosphorylase only when the hormone was added to a solution containing intact cells. This result told Sutherland two things. First, epinephrine does not interact directly with the enzyme responsible for glycogen breakdown; an intermediate step or series of steps must be occurring inside the cell. Second, the plasma membrane is somehow involved in transmitting the epinephrine signal.

Sutherland's early work suggested that the process going on at the receiving end of a cellular conversation can be dissected into three stages: reception, transduction, and response (FIGURE 11.5):



Click image to enlarge



Fig 11-5. Overview of cell signaling. From the perspective of the cell receiving the message, cell signaling can be divided into three stages: signal reception, signal transduction, and cellular response. When reception occurs at the plasma membrane, as shown here, the transduction stage is usually a pathway of several steps, with each molecule in the pathway bringing about a change in the next. The last molecule in the pathway triggers the cell's response. The three stages are explained in the text.


			  
		Reception. Reception is the target cell's detection of a signal coming from outside the cell. A chemical signal is "detected" when it binds to a cellular protein, usually at the cell's surface.


			  
		Transduction. The binding of the signal molecule changes the receptor protein in some way, initiating the process of transduction. The transduction stage converts the signal to a form that can bring about a specific cellular response. In Sutherland's system, the binding of epinephrine to the outside of a receptor protein in a liver cell's plasma membrane leads via a series of steps to activation of glycogen phosphorylase. Transduction sometimes occurs in a single step but more often requires a sequence of changes in a series of different molecules--a signal-transduction pathway. The molecules in the pathway are often called relay molecules.


			  
		Response. In the third stage of cell signaling, the transduced signal finally triggers a specific cellular response. The response may be almost any imaginable cellular activity--such as catalysis by an enzyme (for example, glycogen phosphorylase), rearrangement of the cytoskeleton, or activation of specific genes in the nucleus. The cell-signaling process helps ensure that crucial activities like these occur in the right cells, at the right time, and in proper coordination with the other cells of the organism.

We'll now explore the mechanisms of cell signaling in more detail.




