
AN OVERVIEW OF CELL SIGNALING

 

 Cell signaling evolved early in the history of life



 

 Communicating cells may be close together or far apart



 

 The three stages of cell signaling are reception, transduction, and response



What do cells talk about? What kinds of things does a "talking" cell say to a "listening" cell, and how does the latter cell respond to the message? Let's approach these questions by first looking at communication among microorganisms, for modern microbes are a window to the role of cell signaling in the evolution of life on Earth.





SIGNAL RECEPTION AND THE INITIATION OF TRANSDUCTION

 

 A signal molecule binds to a receptor protein, causing the protein to change shape



 

 Most signal receptors are plasma membrane proteins



When we speak to someone, others nearby may hear our message, sometimes with unfortunate consequences. However, errors of this kind rarely occur among cells. The signals emitted by an a yeast cell are "heard" only by its prospective mates, a cells. Similarly, although epinephrine encounters many types of cells as it circulates in the blood, only certain target cells detect and react to the hormone. The signal receptor is the identity tag on the target cell.





SIGNAL-TRANSDUCTION PATHWAYS

 

 Pathways relay signals from receptors to cellular responses



 

 Protein phosphorylation, a common mode of regulation in cells, is a major mechanism of signal transduction



 

 Certain small molecules and ions are key components of signaling pathways (second messengers)



When signal receptors are plasma membrane proteins, like most of those we have discussed, the transduction stage of cell signaling is usually a multistep pathway. One benefit of such pathways is the possibility of greatly amplifying a signal. If some of the molecules in a pathway transmit the signal to multiple molecules of the next component in the series, the result can be a large number of activated molecules at the end of the pathway. In other words, a small number of extracellular signal molecules can produce a large cellular response. Moreover, multistep pathways provide more opportunities for coordination and regulation than simpler systems do, as we'll discuss later.





CELLULAR RESPONSES TO SIGNALS

 

 In response to a signal, a cell may regulate activities in the cytoplasm or transcription in the nucleus



 

 Elaborate pathways amplify and specify the cell's response to signals



We now take a closer look at the cell's eventual response to an extracellular signal--what some researchers call the "output response." What is the nature of the final step in a signaling pathway?




